Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 26

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Review

Neuraminidase-1: A novel therapeutic target in multistage
tumorigenesis
Fiona Haxho1, Ronald J. Neufeld2 and Myron R. Szewczuk1
1

Departments of Biomedical and Molecular Sciences, Kingston, Ontario, Canada

2

Department of Chemical Engineering, Queen’s University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada

Correspondence to: Myron R. Szewczuk, email: szewczuk@queensu.ca
Keywords: cancer, Neu1, oseltamivir phosphate, tumor angiogenesis, metastasis
Received: March 01, 2016	

Accepted: March 18, 2016	

Published: March 27, 2016

ABSTRACT
Several of the growth factors and their receptor tyrosine kinases (RTK) such
as epidermal growth factor (EGF), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), fibroblast
growth factor (FGF), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), nerve growth factor
(NGF) and insulin are promising candidate targets for cancer therapy. Indeed,
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) have been developed to target these growth factors
and their receptors, and have demonstrated dramatic initial responses in cancer
therapy. Yet, most patients ultimately develop TKI drug resistance and relapse.
It is essential in the clinical setting that the targeted therapies are to circumvent
multistage tumorigenesis, including genetic mutations at the different growth
factor receptors, tumor neovascularization, chemoresistance of tumors, immunemediated tumorigenesis and the development of tissue invasion and metastasis.
Here, we identify a novel receptor signaling platform linked to EGF, NGF, insulin and
TOLL-like receptor (TLR) activations, all of which are known to play major roles in
tumorigenesis. The importance of these findings signify an innovative and promising
entirely new targeted therapy for cancer. The role of mammalian neuraminidase-1
(Neu1) in complex with matrix metalloproteinase-9 and G protein-coupled receptor
tethered to RTKs and TLRs is identified as a major target in multistage tumorigenesis.
Evidence exposing the link connecting growth factor-binding and immune-mediated
tumorigenesis to this novel receptor-signaling paradigm will be reviewed in its current
relationship to cancer.

INTRODUCTION

mediated tumorigenesis, regulation of epithelialmesenchymal transition (EMT), metastasis and acquired
chemoresistance, and regulation of tumor vascularization.
The molecular pathogeneses and new therapeutic
targets with a focus on pancreatic cancer have been
eloquently reviewed by Wong and Lemoine [1, 2]. Here,
a large number of genetic alterations affect only a few
major signaling cascades and processes involved in
pancreatic tumorigenesis. Although some of the important
signaling pathways, such as those involving rat sarcoma
(Ras), epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor, vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), gastrin hormone and
matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) have been targeted with
clinical therapeutic intent, these targeted therapies have
been discouraging in a clinical setting. For examples, the

Neuraminidase-1 (Neu1) has recently emerged
as a central target in sialidase-mediated regulation of
tumorigenesis. Recent evidence indicates that Neu1
plays a much more profound role in human cancers
than previously expected. This review will first describe
the cell-surface molecular platform that controls
Neu1 sialidase activity, and discuss its relevance in
cancer cell signaling. Second, we will summarize the
current understanding of Neu1 activity associated with
cancer development, and outline the key roles of Neu1
during various stages of tumorigenesis, including
regulation of growth factor receptor signaling, control
of TOLL-like receptor (TLR) signaling and immune-

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40860

Oncotarget

failures of (a) bevacizumab, a humanized antibody against
VEGF, in combination with gemcitabine and erlotinib, (b)
sorafenib, a multi-targeted kinase inhibitor that inhibits the
VEGF receptor, platelet-derived growth factor receptor
(PDGFR), stem cell factor receptor/c-Kit, Raf-1 protooncogene, serine/threonine kinase (RAF1) and Fms-like
tyrosine kinase-3 (FLT-3), (c) axitinib, an orally active
inhibitor of both VEGFR and related tyrosine kinase
receptors, and many more anti-cancer agents, collectively
demonstrate the difficulty in the specific targeting and
killing of cancer cells [2].
The mutational expression of EGF receptor in
cancer cells has been identified in a variety of human
tumors, including lung, breast, head and neck, ovarian
and pancreatic cancers [3, 4]. These altered EGFRs have
been reported to promote cell survival, proliferation,
invasion, and metastasis through activation of Janus
kinase/signal transducers and activators of transcription
(JAK/STAT), phosphoinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), serine/
threonine-specific protein kinase-B (Akt), and mitogen
activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathways
[4-6]. The PI3K/Akt signaling pathway is an important
intracellular regulator of the cell cycle. PI3K activation
phosphorylates and activates Akt, localizing it in the
plasma membrane [7]. Activated Akt in turn affects a
number of downstream signaling pathways, such as
(a) the cellular transcriptional factor cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB), (b) inhibiting the
tumor suppressor cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor-1B
(p27), (c) localizing O subclass of the forkhead family
of transcription factors (FOXO) in the cytoplasm, (d)
phosphorylating phosphoinositides [PtdIns-(4,5) P2] at
the 3’ position of the inositol ring to generate PtdIns-[3, 4,
5] P3 (PtdIns-3P), and (e) activating the mammalian target
of rapamycin (mTOR) which is a master regulator of cell
growth and division responding to a variety of stimuli,
such as nutrient, energy, and growth factors. The PI3K/
Akt signaling pathways have been reviewed in detail [79]. Several other factors are known to enhance the PI3K/
Akt signaling pathway, including EGF [10, 11], sonic
hedgehog (shh) pathway [12], insulin growth factor-1
(IGF-1) [13], insulin [14-16], and calcium/calmodulin
(CaM)-dependent protein kinases [17]. The PI3K/Akt
pathway is controlled by various antagonistic factors such
as the tumor suppressor phosphatase and tensin homolog
protein (PTEN) [18-20], glycogen synthase kinase-3β
(Gsk3β), a negative modulator in endothelial cells through
the Wnt/β-catenin/PI3K/AKT/Gsk3β signaling axis in
cancer-induced angiogenesis [21, 22], and the promoter
of homeobox gene HB9 [23]. In many cancers, this PI3K/
Akt pathway is overactive by allowing proliferation and
reducing apoptosis. Logistically, it follows that tyrosine
kinase receptors such as EGFR and others are promising
candidate targets for cancer therapy and have led to the
development of the tyrosine kinase inhibitors, such as
the EGFR-targeting gefitinib and erlotinib. Despite the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

dramatic initial responses to these inhibitors, most patients
ultimately develop drug resistance and relapse.
Drug resistance in over 50% of cancers is caused
by a mutation in the adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
binding pocket of the EGFR kinase domain [24]. This
ATP mutation involves an amino acid substitution within
the domain, changing a small polar threonine residue
with a large nonpolar methionine residue (T790M).
Other instances of drug resistance can involve (a)
amplification of the hepatocyte growth factor receptor,
which drives human epidermal growth factor receptor-3
(HER3 or ERBB3)-dependent activation of PI3K [25,
26], (b) numerous mutations, including recruitment of
a mutated IGF-I receptor to dimerize with EGFR in
forming a heterodimer [27] and allowing activation of the
downstream effectors of EGFR even in the presence of
an EGFR inhibitor, and (c) inactivating mutations of the
PTEN tumor suppressor, which allow increased activation
of Akt-independent stimulation by EGFR [28]. A recent
review by Lin et al. [29] summarizes the activating
mutations located in the tyrosine kinase domains of EGFR
and the major mechanisms of EGFR acquired resistance
against tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). For a clinically
significant anticancer response, treatment strategies
must target and inhibit several oncogenic pathways
simultaneously, or at multiple levels of a major signaling
pathway [1, 2]. For a truly effective clinical outcome, it
is essential that these targeted therapies are to circumvent
the genetic mutations at different growth factor receptor
levels, tumor neovascularization, chemoresistance of
tumors, and the development of metastases.

A NOVEL EGFR-SIGNALING PLATFORM
AND ITS TARGETED TRANSLATION IN
CANCER
A molecular organizational G protein-coupled
receptor (GPCR)-signaling platform was uncovered by
us that was deemed essential for the activation of EGFR
and its targeted translation in pancreatic cancer [30].
This receptor signaling paradigm is depicted in Figure
1, and is described in detail by Abdulkhalek et al. [31].
Here, EGF binding to its receptor has been shown to
induce an endogenous mammalian Neu1 and matrix
metalloproteinase-9 (MMP9) cross-talk in activating the
receptor. Central to this process is that Neu1 and MMP9
form a complex tethered at the ectodomain of EGFRs
on the cell surface. This signaling paradigm proposes
that EGF binding to its receptor causes a conformational
change of EGFR, which results in the activation of
neuromedin B GPCR (NMBR) also tethered to the
receptor. Activated NMBR initiates Gαi-protein signaling
which triggers the activation of MMP9 to subsequently
induce Neu1. Here, activated MMP9 is proposed to
remove the elastin-binding protein (EBP) as part of the
molecular multi-enzymatic complex that contains Neu1
40861

Oncotarget

and protective protein cathepsin A (PPCA) [32]. Activated
Neu1 specifically hydrolyzes the α-2,3-sialyl residues
linked to β-galactosides of EGFR, which are distant from
the EGF binding sites. This prerequisite desialylation
process by Neu1 is predicted to remove steric hindrance
of EGFR to facilitate receptor association, subsequent
activation and downstream signaling.
At the genetic level, we reported that the sialidase
activity associated with EGF stimulation of human
1140F01 and WG0544 type 1 sialidosis ﬁbroblast cell
lines was completely abrogated compared to the wildtype fibroblast cell line [30]. These sialidosis ﬁbroblast
cells were obtained from patients with type 1 sialidosis
or mucolipidosis-1 who have a true Neu1 deﬁciency [33].
In addition, oseltamivir phosphate was found
to target and inhibit Neu1 activity associated with the
activation of glycosylated receptors by their ligands [34,

35]. However, it is noted that oseltamivir phosphate may
also have broader specificity for other sialidases, and thus,
the therapeutic effects of oseltamivir phosphate could be
due to a multitude of different molecular pathways. For
example, in invasive tumors like ovarian cancers, the
transcriptional factor Snail and MMP9 expressions are
closely connected since they have both been implicated
in similar invasive processes [36]. It has been shown that
Snail induces MMP9 secretion via multiple signaling
pathways, but particularly in cooperation with oncogenic
H-Ras (RasV12), Snail leads to the transcriptional
upregulation of MMP9 [37]. There is substantial evidence
to indicate that the zinc-finger transcriptional factors
Snail and Slug, the two-handed zinc factors ZEB1/
dEF1 and ZEB2/SIP1, and the basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factors Twist and E12/E47 play major roles
in epithelial carcinoma plasticity [38-41], and tumor

Figure 1: Neuraminidase-1 (Neu1) and matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP9) cross-talk in alliance with G proteincoupled receptor(s) (GPCR) regulates receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs). Notes: Snail and MMP9 expressions are closely

connected in invasive tumor processes. Snail induces MMP9 secretion via multiple signaling pathways, but particularly in cooperation
with oncogenic H-Ras (RasV12), Snail up-regulates the transcription of MMP9. This Snail-MMP9 signaling axis is the connecting link
to promote RTK glycosylation modification involving this novel receptor-signaling platform. Activated MMP9 is proposed to remove the
elastin-binding protein (EBP) as part of the molecular multi-enzymatic complex that contains β-galactosidase/Neu1 and protective protein
cathepsin A (PPCA) to induce Neu1. Activated Neu1 hydrolyzes α-2,3-sialic acid residues of the glycosylated receptors at the ectodomain
to remove steric hindrance and to facilitate receptor association and activation. This process sets the stage for multistages of tumorigenesis.
Abbreviations: Neu1, neuraminidase-1; MMP, matrix metalloproteinase; PI3K, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; GTP, guanine triphosphate;
GPCR, G protein-coupled receptor; EBP, elastin binding protein; PPCA, protective protein cathepsin A. Citation: Taken in part from:
©Abdulkhalek et al. Research and Reports in Biochemistry 2013:3,17–30, and ©Abdulkhalek et al. Clinical and Translational Medicine
2014:3,28. Publisher and licensee Dove Medical Press Ltd. This is an Open Access article which permits unrestricted non-commercial use,
provided the original work is properly cited.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40862

Oncotarget

progression and invasiveness [42-45]. Since Snail is
identified as a potent EMT mediator, others have reported
that it controls the proteolytic activity of the MMPs that
contribute to the phenotypic changes associated with
EMT and invasion [42]. Taken all together, these different
signaling paradigms involved with EMT in ovarian
cancer suggest that growth factor receptor glycosylation
modification involving the receptor-signaling platform of
a Neu1-MMP9 crosstalk may in fact be the invisible link
connecting the Snail-MMP9 signaling axis as depicted
in Figure 1. It follows that the therapeutic efficacy of
oseltamivir phosphate targeting Neu1 may disrupt these
molecular signaling pathways. Given the ability of
oseltamivir phosphate to increase E-cadherin expression
and decrease N-cadherin and VE-cadherin expression as
previously reported by us [46], tumors treated with this
drug may become more adherent to the surrounding tissue
and not metastasize as our data indicated. We propose
here a graphical abstract (Figure 2) illustrating that the
Snail-MMP9 signaling axis maintains several important
cancer growth factor receptor signaling platforms in
promoting Neu1-MMP9 crosstalk in complex with
glycosylated receptors. Oseltamivir phosphate treatment
strategies under dose dependence would take the form
of a horizontal approach, of which different oncogenic

signaling pathways involved in tumorigenesis are targeted
with promising therapeutic intent.
In contrast, other purified neuraminidase inhibitors
may not be as potent. For examples, BCX-1827 except
BCX-1812, DANA (2-deoxy-2,3-dehydro-N-acetylneuraminic acid), zanamivir (4-guanidino-Neu5Ac2en),
and oseltamivir carboxylate had limited significant
inhibition of lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced sialidase
activity in live BMC-2 macrophage cells at 1–2 mM
compared to the LPS positive control [34]. Oseltamivir
phosphate had an IC50 value of 4.86 μM for EGFR
[30], which is comparable to the reported IC50 values
of 3.876 μM for NGF-TrkA [19] and 1.175 μM for LPSTLR4 [22] ligand-induced sialidase activity in TrkAPC12 and BMC-2 macrophage cells, respectively. For
NGF-induced sialidase activity in TrkA-expressing
cells, we also reported that other puriﬁed neuraminidase
inhibitors such as zanamivir (4-guanidino-Neu5Ac2en)
and oseltamivir carboxylate had a limited inhibition
of NGF-induced sialidase activity in live TrkA-PC12
cells at 1–2 mM compared to the NGF positive control
[35]. Using recombinant soluble human sialidases, Hata
et al. [47] have reported that oseltamivir (actually used
oseltamivir carboxylate) scarcely inhibited the activities
of the four human sialidases even at 1 mM, while

Figure 2: Neu1-MMP9-GPCR signaling platform in the regulation of RTK and the molecular targeting of multistage
tumorigenesis. Neuraminidase-1 (Neu1) and matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP9) cross-talk in alliance with G protein-coupled

receptor(s) (GPCR) regulates receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) and extracellular and intracellular TOLL-like (TLR) receptors in cancer
cells. This process sets the stage for multistage tumorigenesis. Abbreviations: Neu1, neuraminidase-1; MMP, matrix metalloproteinase;
IRβ, insulin receptor β; EGCR, epidermal growth factor receptor; EMT, epithelial-mesenchymal transition; 5-FU, 5-fluorouracil; PI3K,
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; GTP, guanine triphosphate; GPCR, G protein-coupled receptor; EBP, elastin binding protein; PPCA,
protective protein cathepsin A. Citation: Taken in part from: ©Abdulkhalek et al. Research and Reports in Biochemistry 2013:3,17–30,
and ©Abdulkhalek et al. Clinical and Translational Medicine 2014:3,28. Publisher and licensee Dove Medical Press Ltd. This is an Open
Access article which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, provided the original work is properly cited.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40863

Oncotarget

zanamivir significantly inhibited the human Neu2 and
Neu3 sialidases in the micromolar range. Using lysates
from mature dendritic cells, Nan et al. [48] have found that
zanamivir completely inhibited Neu1 and Neu3 sialidase
activity at 2 mM.
Other reports have provided supporting evidence for
a role of Neu1 in the receptor glycosylation modiﬁcation
model in respiratory airway epithelia. Lillehoj et al. [49]
have demonstrated that Neu1 associates with EGFR as
well as with the cell surface associated mucin-1 (MUC1)
in respiratory airway epithelial cells (EC). This Neu1EGFR association was regulated by EGF stimulation
of the cells, which is consistent and fits well with our
receptor signaling platform in Figure 1. However, they
also found that overexpression of Neu1 using recombinant
adenovirus (Ad) encoding FLAG-tagged human NEU1
(Ad-NEU1) diminished EGF-stimulated EGFR Tyr-1068
autophosphorylation by up to 44% but instead, enhanced
MUC1-dependent Pseudomonas aeruginosa adhesion by
about 2-fold and flagellin-stimulated ERK1/2 activation
by nearly 2-fold. In contrast, Neu1 depletion by siRNA
knockdown increased EGFR activation (1.5-fold) and
diminished MUC1-mediated bacterial adhesion (38-56%)
and signaling (73%). These latter results are inconsistent
with the EGFR signaling platform as depicted in Figure
1. It is noteworthy from their supplementary data that
the total EGFR was profoundly diminished following
EGF stimulation, irrespective of Neu1 manipulation,
which was likely due to ligand-dependent endocytosis
and degradation of EGF-EGFR complexes as previously
reported by others [50]. Here, the phospho-Tyr-1068
EGFR signal was normalized to β-tubulin expression.
However, Lillehoj et al. [49] have proposed several
other possibilities and questioned whether Neu1 targets
sialic acid residues within the ligand-binding portion of
the EGFR ectodomain to influence the receptor-ligand
interaction, or it regulates EGFR homo- or heterodimerization, and alters EGFR responsiveness to inhibitory
gangliosides. The effect of overexpression of Neu1 was
suggested to desialylate the terminally sialylated N-linked
oligosaccharides to which ganglioside GM3 binds at the
ectodomain of EGFR, and thereby promoting the GM3–
EGFR interaction and attenuation of EGFR activation
[49]. The inhibitory modulation of EGF receptor activity
by changes in the GM3 content in epidermoid cell lines
has been well documented [51].
The dimerization process of receptors following
EGF binding is an essential required step in the receptor
activation process, but the mechanism of which was
unknown [52-58] until now as depicted in Figure 1. It is
noteworthy that we have reported a striking similarity with
this novel receptor signaling platform for nerve growth
factor (NGF) TrkA receptors [35], insulin [59, 60] and
cell surface TOLL-like receptor (TLR)-4, [34, 61-64]
and intracellular TLR7 and TLR9 receptors [65], all of

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

which require receptor dimerization and are regulated
by Neu1. Pshezhetsky and Ashmarina [66] have recently
summarized the emerging data demonstrating that Neu1,
well known for its lysosomal catabolic function, is also
localized to the cell surface and assumes the previously
unrecognized role as a structural and functional modulator
of cellular receptors.
Although Lillehoj et al. [49] have provided evidence
to show Neu1 associates with EGFR, the effects of NEU1
overexpression in respiratory airway epithelial cells are
inconsistent with this new EGFR signaling platform
(Figure 1). To explain this inconsistency, there have
been attempts in past years to enhance the efficiency of
a biological response by overexpressing single enzymatic
activities in mammalian cells. These approaches have
been successful in some cases by improving cellular
protection from endogenous and exogenous agents,
while overexpression of other enzymatic activities
were detrimental by producing a genome instability
phenotype [67, 68]. Perhaps, overexpression of Neu1 in
metabolically active cancer cells may produce a variant
with different phenotypes. The approach by Gilmour
et al. [30] was to investigate Neu1 regulation of EGFinduced receptor phosphorylation using NIH3T3 mouse
embryo fibroblast cell line overly expressing the human
EGFR (3T3-hEGFR). The data in the report provided
strong evidence to support Neu1 regulation of EGFinduced receptor phosphorylation and subsequent
activation. Firstly, the neuraminidase inhibitor oseltamivir
phosphate as well as anti-Neu1 but not anti-Neu-2, -3
or -4 neutralizing antibodies, inhibited EGF-induced
phosphorylation of EGFR (pEGFR) in 3T3–hEGFR
cells. Secondly, the treatment protocol had no effect on
reducing the expression of EGFR on the cell surface
post-EGF stimulation or treatments, suggesting that
oseltamivir phosphate, anti-Neu1 antibodies as well
as the specific MMP9 inhibitor had a direct inhibitory
effect on the Neu1 activity associated with EGF treated
cells, and it was not due to an internalization of EGFstimulated receptors. Thirdly, M. amurensis lectin
MAL-2 (speciﬁc for α-2,3 sialic acid linked to terminal
β-galactose) signiﬁcantly blocked EGF-induced pEGFR
dose-dependently, but had no effect on Neu1 activation.
In contrast, S. nigra lectin (SNA, which binds to α-2,6
sialic acid linked to terminal galactose and to lesser degree
α-2,3 linkage), peanut agglutinin (PNA, galactosyl (β-1,3)
N-acetylgalactosamine) and succinylated wheat germ
agglutinin (sWGA, N-acetylglucosamine residues) had
little effect on blocking EGF-induced pEGFR activation.
Fourthly, co-immunoprecipitation experiments using cell
lysates from 3T3–hEGFR cells demonstrated that MMP9
forms a complex with naïve and EGF-stimulated EGFRs,
and western blot analyses clearly showed that MMP9i
inhibited EGF-induced pEGFR in these cell lysates.
Fifthly, the anti-cancer role of oseltamivir phosphate

40864

Oncotarget

was also investigated in human pancreatic tumor-bearing
RAGxCγ double mutant mice. Using western blot analyses
for pEGFR, pStat1, and pNFκB in the tumor lysates on
individual tumors taken from the untreated and oseltamivir
phosphate treated cohorts, the data indicated a remarkable
signiﬁcant inhibition of pEGFR and downstream pNFκB
and pStat1 activity in the tumor lysates from oseltamivir
phosphate treated tumor-bearing mice compared to the
untreated cohort. To validate the Western blot analyses,
Bio-Plex phospho-protein multiplex analyses showed that
simultaneously examined phospho-protein end-points
of Akt-Thr308, PDGFRα-Tyr754 and STAT1-Tyr701
were diminished in the tumor lysates from oseltamivir
phosphate treated cohort compared to the untreated group.
In contrast, oseltamivir phosphate treatment increased the
phospho-protein end-points of SMAD2-Ser465/467 and
VEGFR2-Tyr1175 compared to the untreated cohort.
Collectively, the additional intracellular and cell surface
colocalization of Neu1 and MMP9 validated the predicted
cross-talk between the neuromedin B GPCR–MMP9–
Neu1 tripartite tethered to EGF receptors.
Since the activity of Neu1 tethered to EGFR
hydrolyzes α-2,3-sialyl residues exposing terminal
β-galactosides, Gilmour et al. [30] also questioned whether
mammalian lectins would be recruited to stabilize pEGFR.
Confocal microscopy validated the predicted association
of galectin-3 with EGF receptors in naïve (26% overlay)
and EGF-treated (86% overlay) 3T3–hEGFR cells. To
conﬁrm these results, co-immunoprecipitation experiments
using cell lysates from 3T3–EGFR cells further validated
that galectin-3 forms a complex with EGF-stimulated
receptors as predicted. In support of this hypothesis,
Zhao et al. [69] have also shown that activated EGFRs
are anchored on the cell surface by a galectin-3 lattice,
leading to the positive regulation of EGFR signals. Other
reports have demonstrated that galectin-3 is a member of
a large family of β-galactoside-binding lectins on the cell
surface glycoproteins [70], and its expression necessitates
tyrosine kinase phosphorylation [71]. Galectin-3 is
characteristically localized in the cytosol but possesses
the ability to cross intracellular and plasma membranes
to translocate into the nucleus, mitochondria, cell surface
or extracellular milieu [72, 73]. We have reported that
galectin-3 stabilizes Neu1–MMP9 crosstalk in alliance
with neuromedin B GPCR tethered to EGFR at the
ectodomain on the cell surface, which is required for EGFinduced activation of EGFR [30]. Indeed, Moody et al.
[74] have reported that the neuromedin B GPCR regulates
EGFRs by a mechanism dependent on MMP activation,
which fits well with our receptor signaling model (Figure
1). It is well known that agonist-induced GPCRs have
been shown to activate numerous MMPs [75], including
MMP-3 [76], MMP-2 and MMP9 [77, 78], including
members of the ADAM family of metalloproteinases
[79, 80]. We have shown that GPCR agonists can directly
activate Neu1 through the intermediate activity of MMP9
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

in order to induce transactivation of TLRs and subsequent
cellular signaling [62, 65]. These findings are consistent
with our GPCR-Neu1-MMP9 signaling axis tethered to
glycosylated receptors such as EGFR, Trk, insulin, cell
surface and intracellular TLRs.

ABERRANT SIALYLATION IN CANCER
PROGRESSION AND METASTASIS
Over 3-5 decades, altered sialylation of tumor
cell surface glycoproteins has been described to be
highly associated with the metastatic phenotype of
cancer [81-84]. In an effort to understand this metastatic
behaviour in relation to altered sialic acid, tumor cell
surfaces have been extensively analyzed in the past and
present for melanomas [85-93], T-cell hybridomas [94],
methylcholanthrene A-induced T-cell lymphoma sublines
[95, 96], B16F10 melanoma cells [97], metastatic
variants [98] and breast cancer [99]. It is now accepted
that aberrant sialylation in cancer cells is at least one of
the characteristic features associated with the metastatic
potential of cancer cells [93-95, 100].
It is noteworthy from an early study that the
spontaneous high-metastatic variant (ESb) of the mouse
lymphoma L5178Y, which show high propensity for liver
metastases, interacted in vitro with the isolated autologous
hepatocytes [95, 96]. In contrast, the low-metastatic cells
of the same tumor (Eb) did not. The hepatocytes were
found to bind the metastatic variant (ESb) cells through a
lectin-like hepatic binding protein with molecular weights
of 52, 56 and 110 kD, and specificity for D-galactosyl
and N-acetyl-D-galactosaminyl residues. The lowmetastatic cells (Eb) formed hepatocyte interactions
only after neuraminidase pretreatment, indicating that
lectin binding carbohydrate structures existed in a cryptic
form masked on these cells by sialic acid. These results
signify that the metastatic potential of cancer cells may
require special sialoglycan structures expressed on the
cell surface proteins and lipids. In support of this premise,
Passaniti and Hart [101] probed the cell surfaces of several
metastatic variants of the murine B16 melanoma that
were selected for experimental lung-colonizing ability
or for their ability to spontaneously metastasize from the
site of a subcutaneous injection. Probing the cell surface
saccharide topography for specific oligosaccharides, they
found no significant differences between the efficient lungcolonizing variant, B16-F10 and the poorly-colonizing
B16-Fl or B16-Flr variants. In contrast, the spontaneously
metastatic variants contained substantially different levels
of specific sialylation sites. The tumorigenic and nonmetastatic B16-LM3/G3.26 variant contained 4-fold more
GalP1-3GalNAc sialylation sites than the tumorigenic and
highly metastatic B16-LM3/ G3.12 variant. Collectively,
these results suggest that the relative levels of specific
sialoglycan structures correlated well with the ability
of the cells to undergo spontaneous metastasis from a
40865

Oncotarget

subcutaneous tumor.
Other studies have shown that an aberrant
sialylation in metastatic cancer cells may not be the
main characteristic feature. Based on gene transfection
studies, Sawada et al. [102] proposed that alteration of
sialidase expression is not a result of metastasis but rather
a determining event affecting the metastatic ability. The
sialic acid expression seems to vary from cell to cell.
For an example, Miyagi et al. [103] showed results that
3Y1 malignant ﬁbroblasts compared to their parental B16
melanoma cells did not show any signiﬁcant differences
in total cellular and surface sialic acid contents, whereas
Sawada et al. [102] showed results with metastatic clones
of murine colon adenocarcinoma 26, NL17and NL22,
highly metastatic and NL44 and NL4 lowly metastatic
that exhibited a decrease in highly metastatic cells as
compared with their poorly metastatic counterparts. It
is likely that metastasis may not be correlated with the
overall sialic acid content, but only with levels of speciﬁc
molecules that could be targets for endogenous sialidases
and/or sialyltransferases. Yogeeswaran and Tao [82]
have also shown that the sialic acid content in the lowmetastasizing WGAR variant clones of B-16 melanoma
cells was reduced compared to the parental ConR and
RCAR cells. However, the report also emphasized that
the RCAR cells showed decreased metastasizing capacity
without significant alteration in the content of surface
sialic acid. Perhaps, there are certain sialylated Asn-linked
oligosaccharides found on metastatic tumor cells that are
required for expression of the metastatic phenotype as
proposed by Dennis and Laferte [93]. These structures may
be directly associated with β1-6 branching of Asn-linked
oligosaccharides [91]. A detailed review by Park and Lee
[104] summarizes how β-galactoside α2,6 sialyltransferase
(ST6 Gal I) with subsequent elevated levels of cell-surface
α2,6 -linked sialic acids have been implicated in the
altered expression of sialylated glycoproteins with their
linkage to colorectal cancer metastasis, radio-resistance,
and chemoresistance.
The expression levels of α2,3-sialic acid residues
of 50 primary tumor cases, 50 pair-matched lymph node
metastasis tumor samples as well as the MDA-MB-231,
T-47D and MCF-7 breast cancer cell lines with different
metastatic phenotypes were examined by Cui et al. [99].
Using histochemistry, cytochemistry, flow cytometry with
Maackia amurensis lectin (MAL, specificity for α2,3sialic acid), cell adhesion and trans-well in vitro assays,
the data showed that the pair-matched primary lymph
node metastatic tumor samples exhibited significantly
higher levels of expression of α2,3-sialic acid residues
compared to that of primary tumors. In addition, 81.58%
of the primary tumors in T1/T2 stages had weak staining
for MAL, whereas of 12 tumor cases in T3/T4 stages,
only 1 (8.33%) had weak reactions for MAL. The highly
metastatic breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231 exhibited
the strongest binding to MAL and the highest expression
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

levels of α2,3-sialic acid residues among the selected
cell lines, and this feature was dependent on the mRNA
expression levels of α2,3-sialyltransferase gene. The
adhesion, invasion and migration activities conﬁrmed
that MDA-MB-231 exhibited the greater cell adhesion to,
migration toward and invasion to Matrigel.
Recent reviews by Bull et al. [105, 106] have
described the speciﬁc tumor characteristics associated
with the increased expression of sialic acid sugars on the
surface of cancer cells. From a sialic acid perspective,
the reviews describe evidence to support the role of sialic
acids in cancer. Here, tumor-derived sialic acids have been
shown to disable cytotoxicity mechanisms of effector
immune cells, trigger production of immune suppressive
cytokines and dampen activation of antigen-presenting
cells [106]. This aberrant sialylation would indeed favor
tumor growth and progression.
To uncover the differences of protein glycosylation
and further link them to protein functions, Liu et al.
[107] labeled glycosylated proteins with alkyne-sugar
probes, followed by copper [I]-catalyzed alkyne-azide
click chemistry to identify the sialylated and fucosylated
proteins in lung cancer cell lines CL1-0 and CL1-5,
both of which are derived from the same parental cell
line and having distinct invasion capabilities. The data
showed that the more invasive cell line CL1-5 exhibited
higher sialylation and fucosylation levels and expressed
more sialylated proteins. EGFR in CL1-5 exhibited
higher sialylation and fucosylation levels and resulted
in lower dimerization and tyrosine phosphorylation than
in CL1-0 during EGF stimulation. In addition, removal
of sialic acids from EGFR by sialidase increased dimer
formation of EGFR upon EGF treatment on the cell,
and pretreating EGFR with fucosidase also resulted in
a similar dimerization enhancement in vitro. Moreover,
Yen et al. [108] investigated the effect of sialylation on
the phosphorylation profile of EGFR in tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (TKI)-sensitive and TKI-resistant cells. They
showed that sialylation inhibited the association of EGFR
with EGF and the subsequent autophosphorylation. In
the absence of EGF, the TKI-resistant EGFR mutant
at L858R/T790M had a higher degree of sialylation
and phosphorylation at Y1068, Y1086, and Y1173
than the TKI-sensitive EGFR. Although sialylation in
the TKI-resistant mutants suppresses EGFR tyrosine
phosphorylation with the most significant effect on the
Y1173 site, the sialylation effect was not strong enough to
stop cancer progression by inhibiting the phosphorylation
of these three sites. Collectively, these studies reveal the
complexity of EGFR sialylation and phosphorylation
process. Although sialylation is induced to suppress the
phosphorylation of EGFR, the effect of suppression was
not strong enough to inhibit the downstream signaling
necessary for cancer progression.
Interference with sialic acid expression in cancer
cells has been the current target in preventing cancer
40866

Oncotarget

metastasis. In particular, desialylation of cancer cells
by overexpressing human sialidases has been reported
to inhibit metastases in murine metastasis models [109111]. As discussed above, care must be taken in the
interpretation of the data taken from these approaches in
that they may produce genomic instability phenotypes
[68]. However, these overexpressing techniques have
been successful in improving cellular protection from
endogenous and exogenous mutagens. In particular,
Uemura et al. [109] demonstrated that when the human
sialidase gene NEU1 was overexpressed in colon cancer
HT-29 cells, and injected trans-splenically into mice,
the liver metastasis of the NEU1-overexpressing cells
was significantly reduced. In vitro studies also showed
that overexpressing NEU1 suppressed cell migration,
invasion and adhesion, whereas the silencing resulted
in the opposite. Further analyses of the desialylation
process of colon HT-29 cells suggested that NEU1 may
be an important regulator of β4-integrin mediated cellular
signaling, leading to suppression of metastasis. Although
these findings are inconsistent with other studies [30, 82,
99, 102, 103, 112], there might be other explanations.
Since the HT29 cells display an undifferentiated phenotype
and were injected directly into the spleen, they may
have bypassed the extravasation phase of the metastatic
process, and thus only a portion of the total metastatic
process is represented by these cells in the spleen as
suggested in the past by others [101]. Furthermore,
several factors such as oncogenes, hormones, and other
compensatory mechanisms may increase the expression of
sialyltransferases and downregulate the expression of Neu
sialidases in the cancer cells [105]. As a result, sialoglycan
synthesis in the Golgi system by sialyltransferases is
enhanced, and the hydrolysis of sialoglycans by sialidases
in the lysosome is reduced, leading to accumulation of
hypersialylated structures on the cell membrane.
Sialyltransferases constitute an attractive target
as they have been shown to underlie aberrant cancer
sialylation [113, 114]. For an example, Ferreira et al.
[114] questioned if the expression of sialyltransferases is
different in premalignant and in malignant skin tumors.
Their results showed that the high expression of ST3Gal-I
(β-galactoside α2,3-sialyltransferase-I) and ST6Gal-I
(β-galactoside α2,6 sialyltransferase-I) in skin tumors is
associated with tumors with a greater potential for invasion
and metastasis, as in the case of squamous cell carcinoma
[115]. This phenotype may be related to their metastatic
behavior. In addition, Lopez-Morales et al. [116] showed
that α2,3-linked sialic acid and α2,6-linked sialic acid
increased in intensity and distribution in concordance
with low and high squamous intraepithelial neoplasia
lesions and in normal tissue. Interestingly, they proposed
from their data that the change in sialylation occurs before
cancer development and may play an important role in
cellular cervix transformation into cancerous cells.
Chang et al. [97] investigated the effects of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

soyasaponin I (Ssa-I), an inhibitor of sialyltransferases,
on tumor metastasis using a highly metastatic cancer cell
line B16F10. Ssa-I specifically inhibits the expression
of α2,3-linked sialic acids without affecting the other
glycans on the B16F10 cell surface. They found that Ssa-I
decreased the migratory ability of cells and concomitantly
enhanced cell adhesion to extracellular matrix proteins.
Furthermore, Park and Lee [104] found that increasing
STGal-I (β-galactoside α2,6 sialyltransferase) elevated the
levels of cell-surface α2,6-linked sialic acids on proteins
which have been associated with metastatic spread and
therapeutic resistance in colorectal cancer. Collectively,
sialyltransferases are mainly expressed in the Golgi
apparatus where they incorporate sialic acid residues into
assembling glycan structures of cell surface glycoproteins
and lipids. There are more than 20 different human and
murine sialyltransferases which have been identiﬁed.
Hence, the upregulation of sialyltransferases results in
the expression of highly sialylated structures including
sialoglycoproteins, sialogangliosides, or sialyl Lewis a or
x (SLe a/x) antigens.
In addition to sialyltransferases, there are
four types of sialidases in mammalian cells, which
have been found to behave in different ways during
carcinogenesis, and to demonstrate aberrant expression
in cancer progression [117-119]. Endogenous mammalian
sialidases (alternatively referred to as neuraminidases),
are glycohydrolytic enzymes that catalyze the removal
of sialic acid residues from glycoproteins and glycolipids
[118-121]. To date, there are four types of human
sialidases that have been characterized, and are classified
according to their subcellular localization: (a) lysosomal
and cell membrane (Neu1), (b) cytosolic (Neu2), (c)
plasma membrane-bound (Neu3), and (d) lysosomal
or mitochondrial-associated (Neu4). While they share
structural similarities, they differ in their functions and
substrate specificities [121, 122].
Neu1 in the lysosomes is associated with lysosomal
carboxypeptidase A (protective protein cathepsin A),
β-galactosidase, and N-acetyl-galactosamine-6-sulphate
sulphatase [123]. Neu1 functions mainly to regulate
lipid storage in lysosomes, but also negatively regulates
lysosomal exocytosis in hematopoietic cells where it
processes the sialic acids on the lysosomal membrane
protein (LAMP-1) [124]. Traditionally, Neu1 has always
been classed as a lysosomal enzyme until its presence was
discovered at the surface of cells. Elastin binding protein
that is involved in elastin fibre deposition, was found to
form a complex with Neu1/cathepsin A at the cell surface
[125]. In activated lymphocytes, lysosomal sialidase is
redistributed to the cell membrane [126]. Here, a nine-fold
increase in Neu1-specific activity is detected at the cell
surface, where the Neu1-cathepsin A complex influences
signaling that results in the production of interferon-γ
(IFNγ) [48]. Neu1 expression is also upregulated
during monocyte differentiation, and is trafficked to the
40867

Oncotarget

membrane via MHC class II vesicles [123]. More recently,
interactions between sialic acid-binding immunoglobulintype lectins (Siglecs) and TLRs mediated by Neu1
have been reported [127]. The data indicate that TLR4
activation by endotoxin triggers Neu1 translocation to
the cell surface to disrupt TLR4-Siglec-E interaction.
Neu1-deficient mice produce markedly less IgE and IgG1
antibodies following immunization with protein antigens,
the failure of which is to produce IL-4 cytokines [128].
Cytosolic Neu2 is notably expressed in extremely
low or undetectable levels in many human tissues and
cells, with notable exceptions like the placenta and testis
[129], and at higher levels in skeletal muscle [130], the
liver [131], and the thymus [132]. Neu2 has also been
shown to play a significant role in myoblast differentiation
[133]. The crystal structure of human Neu2 in its free form
as well as in complex with the neuraminidase inhibitor
2-deoxy-2,3-dehydro-N-acetylneuraminic acid (DANA)
has been characterized [134].
Plasma membrane-bound Neu3 is involved in
ganglioside degradation and preferentially targets GM3
gangliosides [135, 136]. Neu3 modification of ganglioside
pattern has been implicated in cell-to-cell interactions
[137], modulation of GM3 levels in skeletal myoblasts
favoring their differentiation and protection from apoptosis
[135], and hypoxia activation of Neu3 protecting skeletal
muscle cells from apoptosis through the activation of the
EGFR signaling and the hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)1α [138]. Hepatic Neu3 overexpression was reported to
improve insulin sensitivity and glucose tolerance through
modification of ganglioside composition and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-γ signaling [139]. In
mice, the over-expression of Neu3 was implicated in the
development of severe insulin-resistant diabetes, and may
be an important regulator of insulin sensitivity and glucose
tolerance. Membrane Neu3 is also highly expressed in
human melanoma cells where it promotes cell growth
with minimal changes in the composition of gangliosides
[140]. Moreover, other studies have reported a relationship
between NEU3 and GD3 synthase genes that were
significantly up-regulated in melanomas in comparison
to melanocytes, possibly as a direct consequence of the
increased expression of the transcriptional factor Sp1
[141]. Neu3 could be involved in melanoma malignancy
by decreasing the levels of Neu5Ac-GM3. Indeed,
Yamaguchi et al. have reported evidence to support
plasma-membrane-associated NEU3 gene regulated by
Sp1/Sp3 transcription factors [142].
Neu4 is highly expressed in the mucosal surfaces
of the colon, although this expression was markedly
reduced in colon cancer, suggesting a protective role for
Neu4 in the maintenance of normal colon mucosa [143].
Additionally, Neu4 can also be localized on the cell surface
of macrophages [144]. We have reported an unprecedented
activation of Neu4 on the cell surface of macrophages,
dendritic cells, and normal and type I sialidosis human
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

fibroblast cells by thymoquinone (TQ) [145]. TQ which
is derived from the nutraceutical black cumin oil had no
inhibitory effect on endotoxin lipopolysaccharide (LPS)induced sialidase activity in live BMC-2 macrophage
cells [145]. In contrast, the parent black seed cumin oil
and another constituent para-cymene of the oil completely
blocked LPS-induced sialidase activity. All of these
compounds had no effect on cell viability. Furthermore,
the mechanism of TQ-induced Neu4 activation on the
cell surface was determined to involve the potentiation
of GPCR-signaling by TQ via membrane targeting of Gαi
subunit proteins and MMP9 activation [144].
With a particular focus on cancer, the four types
of mammalian sialidases have been described to behave
in different manners during carcinogenesis, but their
alterations however, may influence or facilitate a
malignant phenotype including uncontrolled growth,
invasion and metastasis [146]. The report proposed that
these sialidases are important enzymes that may redefine
cancer malignancy and thus may be potential targets for
cancer diagnosis and therapy.

GPCR SIGNAL INTEGRATION IN
RECEPTOR
TYROSINE
KINASE
ACTIVATION
The GPCR signal integration in receptor tyrosine
kinase activation has been extensively reviewed by Patel
[147] and Abdulkhalek et al. [31]. MMP9 and neuromedin
B GPCR (NMBR) are associated with each other on the
cell surface, and together form a complex with EGFR
[30], TrkA receptors [35], insulin receptor IRβ subunits
[59], TLR-4 [34, 61, 62, 64], and TLR7 and -9 [65]. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments using cell lysates from
RAW-blue macrophage cells demonstrated that the 80 kDa
NMBR isoform forms a complex with the active 88 kDa
MMP9 isoform from naïve or lipopolysaccharide (LPS)stimulated cells [62]. These data further validated that
NMBR forms a complex with MMP9 on the cell surface
of naïve cells. The report also showed that GPCR agonists
(including bombesin, lysophosphatidic acid (LPA),
cholesterol, angiotensin-1 and -2, and bradykinin) binding
to their respective GPCRs induce Neu1 activity within
1 minute [62]. This prompt Neu1 activity was blocked
by Gαi-sensitive pertussis toxin, the neuraminidase
inhibitor oseltamivir phosphate, broad-range MMP
inhibitors galardin and piperazine, anti-Neu1 and antiMMP9 antibodies, and siRNA knockdown of MMP9. The
rapid GPCR agonist-induced Neu1 activity verifies that
sialylated receptors, including RTKs and TLRs, form a
functional GPCR-signaling complex as depicted in Figure
1.
It has also been shown that insulin can mediate
increases in MMP9 via insulin receptor (IR) activation
[148], which fits well within this molecular signaling
platform for insulin-induced receptors [59]. The study has
40868

Oncotarget

also shown that insulin can induce MMP9 upregulation
via the mitogenic signaling pathways, and renders the
PI3K-dependent signaling pathway unnecessary. Indeed,
the PI3K-dependent pathway is typically altered and is
not required in insulin resistance [148]. The connection
between GPCR and IR has also been demonstrated
for β-adrenergic receptors tethered to IR in adipocytes
[149-152]. These reports showed that insulin-bound IR
stimulates the Tyr-350 phosphorylation of the β-adrenergic
receptor, and that this process facilitates IR tethering to
β-adrenergic receptor via growth factor receptor-bound
protein-2 (Grb-2). This molecular signaling platform
integrating the IR/β-adrenergic receptor/Grb-2 tripartite
complex is critical for insulin-dependent activation of
p42/p44 MAPK. These RTK–GPCR signaling platforms
are reviewed in detail by Pyne and Pyne [153] and
Abdulkhalek et al. [31], and thus, may play an essential
role in tumorigenesis. Indeed, membrane lipid rafts are
highly ordered membrane domains that are enriched in
cholesterol, sphingolipids and gangliosides. They behave
as major modulators of membrane geometry, lateral
movement of molecules, traffic and signal transduction.
Lipid rafts have recently been reviewed in detail as major
platforms for signaling regulation in cancer [13].

in cancer cells is characterized by a loss of E-cadherin,
cell-to-cell adhesion, and a promotion of cancer cell
metastasis and progression. Creighton and colleagues
have eloquently reviewed the role of EMT programming
in cancer cell invasion and metastasis [159]. The report
describes cells undergoing EMT that typically show
both an increase in vimentin, N-cadherin, fibronectin,
integrin αvβ6, and a decrease in E-cadherin, desmoplakin,
cytokeratins, and occludin. In addition, several
transcriptional suppressor families have been described
that regulate EMT, including the zinc-finger proteins
Snail1 and Snail2, the two-handed zinc-finger δEF1
family factors (δEF1/Zeb1 and SIP1/Zeb2), and the basic
helix–loop–helix factors, Twist and E12/E47. Evidence
also suggests that signals derived from the cellular
microenvironment can regulate EMT, such as through
cell–cell contacts mediated by families of transmembrane
receptors and ligands expressed on adjacent cells.
What is less clear is the relationship between EMT and
chemoresistance in cancer. It is noteworthy that silencing
of the two-handed zinc-finger δEF1 family factor, ZEB1,
a transcriptional repressor of E-cadherin, actually restored
the drug sensitivity in pancreatic cancer cells [160].
Other reports have indicated phenotypic changes which
are consistent with EMT in breast, ovarian, and lung
cancer cells that become resistant to drug therapy [156,
158, 161, 162]. Collectively, these results suggest a link
between EMT and the acquisition of drug resistance, but
the mechanisms behind this link may be complex and are
not well understood.
There are reports that strongly implicate
transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) with EMT [163167]. TGF-β is a multifunctional cytokine that is closely
involved in regulating numerous physiological processes,
but also functions as a powerful tumor suppressor in
mammary epithelial cells (MECs), whose neoplastic
development ultimately converts TGF-β into an oncogenic
cytokine in aggressive late-stage mammary tumors
[159]. Recent findings have implicated the process of
EMT in mediating the functional conversion of TGF-β
during breast cancer progression, suggesting that the
chemotherapeutic targeting of EMT induced by TGF-β
may offer new approaches in ameliorating metastatic
disease [159, 168]. Katoh et al. [169] have reported
that Hedgehog signaling activation indirectly leads to
EMT through Notch, TGF-β signaling cascades, and a
small non-coding RNA molecule, microRNA (miRNA),
regulatory networks. For an example, Hedgehog signaling
induces Notch ligand JAG2 upregulation for Notch-CSLmediated SNAI1 upregulation, as well as TGF-β secretion
for ZEB1 and ZEB2 upregulation via TGF-β receptor and
NF-κB [169]. TGF-β-mediated down-regulation of miR141, miR-200a, miR-200b, miR-200c, miR-205, and miR429 results in upregulation of ZEB1 and ZEB2 proteins.
Hedgehog signaling activation may indirectly lead to EMT
through Notch, TGF-β signaling cascades, and miRNA

ROLE OF NEU1 SIALIDASE IN CANCER
CELL SURVIVAL AND ACQUIRED
CHEMORESISTANCE
The mechanism(s) by which cancer cells acquire
resistance to chemotherapy is not well understood. An
insight into the chemoresistance of PANC-1, Mia-PaCa-2
and ASPC-1 pancreatic cancer cells came from a study
describing the aggressive and highly metastatic behaviour
of pancreatic cancer due to an aberrant expression of nerve
growth factor (NGF) and its high-affinity receptor, protooncogene TrkA [154]. We have reported that a Neu1MMP9 crosstalk in alliance with neuromedin GPCR Gαisignaling also regulates NGF induced TrkA activation,
downstream cellular signaling, and cellular function [35].
Chemoresistance along with high rates of metastasis
has been shown to contribute to the low survival rates
of patients diagnosed with pancreatic cancer [155].
Currently, the standard of care for patients with pancreatic
cancer is a chemotherapeutic agent called gemcitabine.
Although treatment with gemcitabine shows higher
success rates than any other chemotherapeutic used, such
as 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and cisplatin, patients receiving
gemcitabine treatments only achieve a progression-free
survival ranging from 0.9-4.2 months [156]. Given the
poor response rate to gemcitabine, it has been suggested
that pancreatic cancer cells develop rapid resistance to this
drug [156, 157].
Within the last decade, studies have reported that
there is a unique connection between drug resistance and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) [156, 158]. EMT
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40869

Oncotarget

regulatory networks [169]. Olive et al. have reported that
inhibition of Hedgehog signaling enhanced the delivery
of gemcitabine chemotherapy in a KPC rodent model of
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma [170]. Collectively,
it was proposed that if a drug could halt the process of
EMT, it might also overcome chemoresistance, reduce
metastasis, and thereby, improve the prognosis for patients
diagnosed with pancreatic cancer.
When cancer cells utilize signaling initiated by
EGFRs, they establish an anti-apoptotic state within the
cell as well as to upregulate mitogenic, angiogenic and
pro-invasive cellular mechanisms [171]. EGFR signaling
has also been linked to EMT [172]. Therapeutic targeting
EGFR and its inhibition can cause a reversal of EMT
in human pancreatic cancer [172]. Other studies have
suggested the potential role of growth factor receptor
signaling in establishing chemoresistance of cancer cells
[173-176]. Since EGFR signaling appears to be involved
in both the acquisition of chemoresistance and the
induction of EMT, it represents a prime therapeutic target.
We have reported that chronic treatment of human
pancreatic PANC1 cancer cells with 0.01µM gemcitabine,
80µM cisplatin, or in their combination resulted in
characteristic morphological changes with increased
spindle shape morphology and cellular projections
[46]. In addition, there were clear molecular alterations
involving increased expressions of N- and VE-cadherin
and a decreased expression of E-cadherin. These cadherin
markers are consistent with other reports of EMT [177179]. The report has also identified that oseltamivir
phosphate has the ability to induce mesenchymal to
epithelial transition (MET) both in vitro and in vivo.
PANC1 chemoresistant cell lines (PANC1-GemR,
PANC1-CisR, and PANC1-GemR/CisR) treated with
oseltamivir phosphate resulted in the largest reduction
of cell viability compared to PANC1 cells with the drug
treatment alone. These results highlight the synergistic
impact of oseltamivir phosphate and chemotherapeutics
on chemoresistant PANC1 cell viability. This effect
also suggests the capability of oseltamivir phosphate to
reverse and increase the sensitivity of cancer cells to the
chemotherapeutic agent to which they acquired resistance.
Although oseltamivir phosphate has been shown to
target and inhibit Neu1 sialidase activity associated with
ligand-induced receptor activation on the cell surface
[34], it may actually have broader specificities for other
sialidases. With regard to chemoresistance of cancer cells,
the therapeutic effects of oseltamivir phosphate could
be due to a multitude of different molecular pathways.
Connecting chemoresistance with Neu1 sialidase, another
report found that MUC1 induces drug resistance in
human (BxPC3 and Capan-1) and mouse (KCKO, KCM)
pancreatic cancer cells [180]. These pancreatic cancer
cells expressing high levels of MUC1 exhibited increased
resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs such as gemcitabine
and etoposide in comparison with cells that express low
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

levels of MUC1. This chemoresistance was attributed to
the enhanced expression of multidrug resistance (MDR)
genes including ABCC1, ABCC3, ABCC5 and ABCB1
[180]. Of particular interest, the levels of the multidrug
resistance-associated protein-1 (MRP1) encoded by the
ABCC1 gene were significantly higher in the MUC1high cancer cells. In BxPC3 and Capan-1 cells, MUC1
upregulated MRP1 via an Akt-dependent signaling
pathway, whereas in KCM cells, MUC1-mediated
MRP1 upregulation was an Akt-independent mediated
mechanism(s). It is unclear the reason(s) for this disparity
in the cancer cells, but in KCM, BxPC3 and Capan-1
cells, the cytoplasmic tail motif of MUC1 associated
directly with the promoter region of the Abcc1/ABCC1
gene. This latter report provided evidence for a critical
role of MUC1 directly regulating the expression of MDR
genes in pancreatic cancer cells, and thus conferring drug
resistance [180]. Since Neu1 sialidase activity was shown
to regulate MUC1 [49], it would suggest that MDR might
be one of mechanisms why PANC1-GemR, PANC1-CisR
and PANC1-GemR/CisR cells are resistant. Oseltamivir
phosphate targeting Neu1 may also impact on this MUC1mediated MRP1 upregulated pathway in addition to its
impact on EGFR [30] and other growth factor receptors.
The therapeutic effects of oseltamivir phosphate could
thus impact different molecular pathways as described
above. Based on preclinical data using a mouse model
of human pancreatic cancer, we proposed that Neu1 is
a novel alternate anti-cancer target in restraining tumor
neovascularization, growth, metastases, and macrophagemediated tumorigenesis [30]. The premise is that Neu1
forms a complex with a broad range of glycosylated
growth factor receptors including sensory TLR receptors
[31].

IMMUNE-MEDIATED TUMORIGENESIS
AND THE ROLE OF MACROPHAGES
Several reports based on clinical studies have shown
that patients with chronic inflammation may be at risk
of developing cancer [181-186]. For example, patients
with chronic pancreatitis or gastric carcinoma following
infection with Helicobacter pylori may be predisposed
at an increased risk of pancreatic cancer. Patients with
Crohn’s disease or ulcerative colitis may develop
colorectal cancer [181, 183-186]. Research studies
linking chronic inflammation with cancer have suggested
that macrophage-mediated tumor initiation at these
sites. Through their persistent inflammatory role during
the process of chronic inflammation, macrophages can
secret pro-inflammatory cytotoxic molecules, including
reactive nitrogen (RNI) and oxygen (ROI) intermediates
that result in tissue and DNA damage, development of
mutations, and establish a defective p53 activity in the
surrounding epithelial cells, and thus predisposing the
microenvironment to oncogenic transformation and
40870

Oncotarget

tumor onset [181, 182, 187]. Additionally, these tumorassociated macrophages (TAM) are noted to produce
a series of cytokines including TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6
that predispose premalignant cells to survival signals, and
thereby establishing macrophage-mediated tumorigenesis
[183-186, 188].
In addition to their role in tumor initiation,
macrophages have a unique ability to shift phenotypes
during the course of tumor progression. As previously
mentioned, macrophages appear to release factors
that promote neoplastic transformation during tumor
onset in a given tissue. Once tumors are established,
macrophages will “switch” to an immunosuppressive
phenotype that supports tumor vascularization, growth
and metastasis [189, 190]. This shift in phenotype is
characterized by the two distinct polarization states
of macrophages: the classically activated M1, and the
alternatively activated M2 macrophages [191]. M1
macrophages are pro-inflammatory cells characterized
by the release of inflammatory cytokines and cytotoxic
molecules. Generally, M1 macrophages play vital roles
in clearing pathogens and in initial antitumoral responses.
In contrast, M2 macrophages are immunosuppressive and
have the ability to release high levels of anti-inflammatory
cytokines, and support angiogenesis, tissue remodeling,
and repair. M2 macrophages, as well as M2-like TAMs,
are known to reside in established tumors and promote
tumor growth and metastases. [192-194]. Thus, evidence
suggests that the stage of tumor development in a given
tissue determines the different display of macrophage
subsets, with pro-inflammatory M1 macrophages in
sites of tumor initiation, and tumor-promoting M2-like
TAMs in established tumors. Evidence shows that once
tumors develop, TAMs become immunosuppressive and
have a defective ability (a) to release pro-inflammatory
cytokines, (b) to present tumor-associated antigen, (c)
to lyse tumor cells, and (d) to stimulate the antitumor
functions of T cells and NK cells [192, 195, 196]. In
some forms of human tumors, TAMs have also been
reported to show defective release of IL-12 [197], and to
increase secretion of anti-inflammatory cytokines such
as IL-10 [197, 198], to influence tumor progression via
the promotion of tumor vascularization, growth, survival,
and metastasis [182, 192, 199, 200]. The role of TAMs
in tumor neovascularization is thought to involve a wide
array of pro-angiogenic factors and enzymes, including
VEGF-A, VEGF-C, and MMP9 [182]. A review by Biswas
et al. [201] highlights several molecular mechanisms of
macrophages that are involved in tumor progression. In
addition, the activation of NF-κB in macrophages can
be mediated by cell surface and intracellular Toll-like
receptors (TLR) [183-186, 188], the process of which
has been shown to play major roles in cancer. We have
reported for the ﬁrst time that Neu1 sialidase clearly plays
a central role in mediating cell surface and nucleic acidinduced intracellular TLR activation, and the interactions
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

involving NMBR–MMP9–Neu1 cross-talk constitute a
novel intracellular TLR signaling platform that is essential
for NF-κB activation and pro-inﬂammatory responses [31,
61, 62, 65].

NEU1 SIALIDASE REGULATES TUMOR
NEOVASCULARIZATION, GROWTH,
AND METASTASIS IN MOUSE MODELS
OF HUMAN OVARIAN AND TRIPLENEGATIVE BREAST CANCERS
There is substantial evidence to indicate that the
zinc-finger transcriptional factors Snail and Slug (the twohanded zinc factors ZEB1/dEF1 and ZEB2/SIP1 and the
basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors Twist and E12/
E47) play major roles in epithelial carcinoma plasticity
[38-41], and tumor progression and invasiveness [4245]. Since Snail is identified as a potent EMT mediator,
others have reported that it controls the proteolytic activity
of MMPs that contribute to the phenotypic changes
associated with EMT and invasion [42]. Their data
indicated that knockdown of Snail expression reduced the
mRNA level of MMP-2 and suppressed the gelatinolytic
activity of MMP-2 and MMP9 in vitro, and inhibited the
catalytic activity of MMP-2 in vivo. It was proposed that
Snail plays an essential role in upregulating the proteolytic
activity of MMPs during invasion and metastasis. Others
have provided additional confirmation for Snail in
inducing MMP-1, -2, -7 and -14 in liver and squamous cell
carcinoma lines [202] as well as MMP9 in Madin-Darby
canine kidney (MDCK) epithelial cells [37]. Moreover,
MMP9 has been shown to trigger the angiogenic switch
during carcinogenesis [203]. However, the molecular
mechanism(s) by which the Snail-MMP signaling axis
functions in tumor neovascularization remained unknown
until now.
As previously discussed, the signaling paradigm
depicted in Figure 1 describes a GPCR-MMP9-Neu1
signaling axis that is induced by RTK ligand binding and
receptor activation on the cell surface. The molecular
interactions within this model are proposed to control
key downstream tumor-specific mechanisms involved in
cancer progression. The initial induction of GPCR and
Gai-signaling is an important process in this paradigm.
Specifically, our data indicate that the neuromedin B
GPCR might be involved in this process [30]. Indeed,
Moody et al. [74] have also reported that the neuromedin B
receptor regulates EGFR transactivation by a mechanism
dependent on proto-oncogene tyrosine-protein kinase
(Src) as well as MMP activation. We have also reported
that different GPCR agonists can indirectly activate
Neu1 through the intermediate MMP9 in order to induce
transactivation of TLRs and subsequent cellular signaling
[62]. Similarly, other reports have found a dramatic
increase in the activity of MMP9 in gemcitabine-resistant
40871

Oncotarget

pancreatic cancer cells [204], which fits well within our
molecular signaling platform of Neu1-MMP9 cross-talk
in regulating growth factor receptors.
The role of MMPs in cancer development, and
specifically the role of MMP9, has been well documented
[205]. Evidently, the function of transcriptional factor
Snail controlling MMP9 expression may be critical in
the initiation of his process. Indeed, our recent studies
have shown that the induction of MMP9 by Snail occurs
in ovarian A2780 cancer cells, and is able to regulate
tumor neovascularization [206]. This Snail-MMP-9
signaling axis may be a regulator of the proposed signaling
paradigm as previously described by us [31].
These signaling processes in tumors have also been
observed in mouse models of human triple-negative breast
cancer (TNBC). We have also reported that heterotopic
xenografts of MDA-MB-231 tumors developed robust
vascularization in RAG2xCγ double mutant mice [112].
Oseltamivir phosphate treatment at 50 mg/kg completely
ablated tumor vascularization, tumor growth and spread
to the lungs with significant long-term survival at day
180 post-implantation, exhibiting tumor shrinkage and
no relapse after 56 days off drug. To date, there are no
targeted therapies that are effective for TNBC, and the
current state of treatment options is extensively reviewed
by Rastelli et al. [207].
For A2780 ovarian [206] and TNBC MDA-MB-231
[112] cancer cells, we proposed that Snail may play an
essential role in tumor neovascularization. Here, Neu1
might be an intermediate candidate connecting the SnailMMP9 signaling axis in tumor neovascularization and in
promoting the growth and invasiveness of human triple
negative breast and ovarian cancers. Indeed, Bergers et al.
[203] have reported that MMP9 triggers the angiogenic
switch during carcinogenesis. An angiogenic switch
paradigm has been proposed for (a) a mouse model of
breast cancer by macrophages [190], (b) a balance between
two distinct TGF-β receptor signaling pathways [208], and
(c) in macrophages involving synergy between TLR-2, -4,
-7, and -9 and adenosine A(2A) receptors [209].

importance of Neu1 as a new target in cancer treatment.
Indeed, the desialylation activity of Neu1 has been shown
to regulate cancer growth, and its selective inhibition
has demonstrated significant therapeutic results in
murine models of cancer. Neu1 inhibition by oseltamivir
phosphate has been shown to specifically increase
E-cadherin expression and to decrease N-cadherin
expression in pancreatic cancer [30, 46], triple-negative
breast cancer [112] and in ovarian tumor models [206].
This shift in E- and N-cadherin expression may obstruct
the occurrence of EMT in drug-resistant phenotypes,
prevent cancer cell metastases, and improve the drug
sensitivity of chemoresistant cells. In summary, the reports
in this review implicate Neu1 as a novel therapeutic target
in cancer therapy, and as a promising intervention in
multistage tumor development.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by grants to M.R.
Szewczuk and R. J. Neufeld from NSERC and private
sector cancer funding from the Josefowitz Family to M.R.
Szewczuk.

CONFLICTS OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

Authors’ Information
F. Haxho is the recipient of Queen’s Graduate Award
(QGA), the Graduate Entrance Tuition Award (GETA),
and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council of Canada (NSERC) Alexander Graham Bell
Canada Graduate Scholarship-Master’s (CGS M).

Editorial note
This paper has been accepted based in part on peerreview conducted by another journal and the authors’
response and revisions as well as expedited peer-review
in Oncotarget.

CONCLUSIONS
The multistage developments of cancer, including
tumor onset, proliferation, angiogenesis, immune evasion,
and metastases, collectively call upon an alternate and
broad-range approach to combating the disease. Here, we
present a novel GPCR-MMP9-Neu1 signaling model that
may play unprecedented roles in tumor progression and
a novel role for therapeutic targeting of the multistage
tumorigenesis. The preliminary involvement of Snail
within this model may provide the molecular mechanism
that controls this process, and its regulation in tumor
development and vascularization. This review summarizes
the recent studies that identify the tumor-specific role
of the structures within our model, and emphasizes the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

REFERENCES
1.	 Wong HH and Lemoine NR. Pancreatic cancer: molecular
pathogenesis and new therapeutic targets. Nature reviews
Gastroenterology & hepatology. 2009; 6(7):412-422.
2.	

Wong HH and Lemoine NR. Novel therapies for pancreatic
cancer: setbacks and progress. Future oncology. 2010;
6(7):1061-1064.

3.	 Mendelsohn J and Baselga J. Status of epidermal growth
factor receptor antagonists in the biology and treatment of
cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2003; 21(14):2787-2799.
40872

Oncotarget

4.	 Ono M and Kuwano M. Molecular mechanisms of
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) activation and
response to gefitinib and other EGFR-targeting drugs.
Clinical cancer research. 2006; 12(24):7242-7251.

17.	 Willard SS and Koochekpour S. Glutamate, glutamate
receptors, and downstream signaling pathways.
International journal of biological sciences. 2013; 9(9):948959.

5.	

18.	 Carnero A, Blanco-Aparicio C, Renner O, Link W and Leal
JF. The PTEN/PI3K/AKT signalling pathway in cancer,
therapeutic implications. Current cancer drug targets. 2008;
8(3):187-198.

Gazdar AF. Personalized medicine and inhibition of EGFR
signaling in lung cancer. The New England journal of
medicine. 2009; 361(10):1018-1020.

6.	 Gazdar AF. Activating and resistance mutations of EGFR
in non-small-cell lung cancer: role in clinical response to
EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Oncogene. 2009; 28 Suppl
1:S24-31.
7.	

19.	 Blanco-Aparicio C, Renner O, Leal JF and Carnero A.
PTEN, more than the AKT pathway. Carcinogenesis. 2007;
28(7):1379-1386.

Peltier J, O’Neill A and Schaffer DV. PI3K/Akt and CREB
regulate adult neural hippocampal progenitor proliferation
and differentiation. Developmental neurobiology. 2007;
67(10):1348-1361.

20.	 Jiang BH and Liu LZ. PI3K/PTEN signaling in
tumorigenesis and angiogenesis. Biochim Biophys Acta.
2008; 1784(1):150-158.
21.	 Lee HC, Lin YZ, Lai YT, Huang WJ, Hu JR, Tsai JN and
Tsai HJ. Glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta in somites plays
a role during the angiogenesis of zebrafish embryos. Febs j.
2014; 281(19):4367-4383.

8.	 Barthel A, Ostrakhovitch EA, Walter PL, Kampkotter A
and Klotz LO. Stimulation of phosphoinositide 3-kinase/
Akt signaling by copper and zinc ions: mechanisms and
consequences. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2007; 463(2):175182.

22.	 Katoh M and Katoh M. Cross-talk of WNT and FGF
signaling pathways at GSK3beta to regulate beta-catenin
and SNAIL signaling cascades. Cancer biology & therapy.
2006; 5(9):1059-1064.

9.	 Martelli AM, Tazzari PL, Evangelisti C, Chiarini F,
Blalock WL, Billi AM, Manzoli L, McCubrey JA and
Cocco L. Targeting the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/
Akt/mammalian target of rapamycin module for acute
myelogenous leukemia therapy: from bench to bedside.
Current medicinal chemistry. 2007; 14(19):2009-2023.

23.	 Peviani M, Tortarolo M, Battaglia E, Piva R and Bendotti C.
Specific induction of Akt3 in spinal cord motor neurons is
neuroprotective in a mouse model of familial amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis. Molecular neurobiology. 2014; 49(1):136148.

10.	 Kim K, Wu HG and Jeon SR. Epidermal Growth Factorinduced Cell Death and Radiosensitization in Epidermal
Growth Factor Receptor-overexpressing Cancer Cell Lines.
Anticancer Res. 2015; 35(1):245-253.
11.	 Safdari Y, Khalili M, Ebrahimzadeh MA, Yazdani Y and
Farajnia S. Natural inhibitors of PI3K/AKT signaling in
breast cancer: Emphasis on newly-discovered molecular
mechanisms of action. Pharmacol Res. 2014.

24.	 Balak MN, Gong Y, Riely GJ, Somwar R, Li AR, Zakowski
MF, Chiang A, Yang G, Ouerfelli O, Kris MG, Ladanyi
M, Miller VA and Pao W. Novel D761Y and common
secondary T790M mutations in epidermal growth factor
receptor-mutant lung adenocarcinomas with acquired
resistance to kinase inhibitors. Clinical cancer research.
2006; 12(21):6494-6501.

12.	 Marechal R, Jean-Baptiste B, Annabelle C, Pieter D, Jean
Robert D, Magali SM, Jerome C, Armelle B, Francesco P,
Genevieve M, Pascal H, Christophe L, Francois P, Philippe
B, Yves-Patrice LT, Jean-Christophe V, et al. Sonic
Hedgehog and Gli1 expression predict outcome in resected
pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Clinical cancer research. 2014.

25.	 Engelman JA, Zejnullahu K, Mitsudomi T, Song Y, Hyland
C, Park JO, Lindeman N, Gale CM, Zhao X, Christensen J,
Kosaka T, Holmes AJ, Rogers AM, Cappuzzo F, Mok T,
Lee C, et al. MET amplification leads to gefitinib resistance
in lung cancer by activating ERBB3 signaling. Science.
2007; 316(5827):1039-1043.

13.	 Mollinedo F and Gajate C. Lipid rafts as major platforms
for signaling regulation in cancer. Advances in biological
regulation. 2014.

26.	 Bean J, Brennan C, Shih JY, Riely G, Viale A, Wang L,
Chitale D, Motoi N, Szoke J, Broderick S, Balak M, Chang
WC, Yu CJ, Gazdar A, Pass H, Rusch V, et al. MET
amplification occurs with or without T790M mutations
in EGFR mutant lung tumors with acquired resistance to
gefitinib or erlotinib. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007;
104(52):20932-20937.

14.	 Wang Y, Ali Y, Lim CY, Hong W, Pang ZP and Han W.
Insulin-stimulated leptin secretion requires calcium and
PI3K/Akt activation. Biochem J. 2014; 458(3):491-498.
15.	 Chi M, Ye Y, Zhang XD and Chen J. Insulin induces drug
resistance in melanoma through activation of the PI3K/Akt
pathway. Drug design, development and therapy. 2014;
8:255-262.

27.	 Jones HE, Goddard L, Gee JM, Hiscox S, Rubini M, Barrow
D, Knowlden JM, Williams S, Wakeling AE and Nicholson
RI. Insulin-like growth factor-I receptor signalling and
acquired resistance to gefitinib (ZD1839; Iressa) in human
breast and prostate cancer cells. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2004;
11(4):793-814.

16.	 Yao H, Han X and Han X. The Cardioprotection of the
Insulin-Mediated PI3K/Akt/mTOR Signaling Pathway.
American journal of cardiovascular drugs : drugs, devices,
and other interventions. 2014; 14(6):433-442.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28.	 Sos ML, Koker M, Weir BA, Heynck S, Rabinovsky R,

40873

Oncotarget

Zander T, Seeger JM, Weiss J, Fischer F, Frommolt P,
Michel K, Peifer M, Mermel C, Girard L, Peyton M, Gazdar
AF, et al. PTEN loss contributes to erlotinib resistance in
EGFR-mutant lung cancer by activation of Akt and EGFR.
Cancer Res. 2009; 69(8):3256-3261.

40.	 Imai T, Horiuchi A, Wang C, Oka K, Ohira S, Nikaido
T and Konishi I. Hypoxia attenuates the expression
of E-cadherin via up-regulation of SNAIL in ovarian
carcinoma cells. Am J Pathol. 2003; 163(4):1437-1447.
41.	 Grunert S, Jechlinger M and Beug H. Diverse cellular and
molecular mechanisms contribute to epithelial plasticity and
metastasis. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2003; 4(8):657-665.

29.	 Lin Y, Wang X and Jin H. EGFR-TKI resistance in NSCLC
patients: mechanisms and strategies. American journal of
cancer research. 2014; 4(5):411-435.

42.	 Jin H, Yu Y, Zhang T, Zhou X, Zhou J, Jia L, Wu Y,
Zhou BP and Feng Y. Snail is critical for tumor growth
and metastasis of ovarian carcinoma. Int J Cancer. 2010;
126(9):2102-2111.

30.	 Gilmour AM, Abdulkhalek S, Cheng TS, Alghamdi F,
Jayanth P, O’Shea LK, Geen O, Arvizu LA and Szewczuk
MR. A novel epidermal growth factor receptor-signaling
platform and its targeted translation in pancreatic cancer.
Cell Signal. 2013; 25(12):2587-2603.

43.	 Peinado H, Marin F, Cubillo E, Stark HJ, Fusenig N, Nieto
MA and Cano A. Snail and E47 repressors of E-cadherin
induce distinct invasive and angiogenic properties in vivo. J
Cell Sci. 2004; 117(Pt 13):2827-2839.

31.	 Abdulkhalek S, Hrynyk, M., Szewczuk, M.R. A novel
G-protein-coupled receptor-signaling platform and its
targeted translation in human disease. Research and Reports
in Biochemistry. 2013; 3:17-30.

44.	 Kurrey NK, K A and Bapat SA. Snail and Slug are
major determinants of ovarian cancer invasiveness at the
transcription level. Gynecologic oncology. 2005; 97(1):155165.

32.	 Bonten EJ, Annunziata I and d’Azzo A. Lysosomal
multienzyme complex: pros and cons of working together.
Cell Mol Life Sci. 2014; 71(11):2017-2032.

45.	 Mikami S, Katsube K, Oya M, Ishida M, Kosaka T, Mizuno
R, Mukai M and Okada Y. Expression of Snail and Slug
in renal cell carcinoma: E-cadherin repressor Snail is
associated with cancer invasion and prognosis. Lab Invest.
2011; 91(10):1443-1458.

33.	 Bifsha P, Landry K, Ashmarina L, Durand S, Seyrantepe V,
Trudel S, Quiniou C, Chemtob S, Xu Y, Gravel RA, Sladek
R and Pshezhetsky AV. Altered gene expression in cells
from patients with lysosomal storage disorders suggests
impairment of the ubiquitin pathway. Cell Death Differ.
2007; 14(3):511-523.

46.	 O’Shea LK, Abdulkhalek S, Allison S, Neufeld RJ and
Szewczuk MR. Therapeutic targeting of Neu1 sialidase
with oseltamivir phosphate (Tamiflu(R)) disables cancer
cell survival in human pancreatic cancer with acquired
chemoresistance. OncoTargets and therapy. 2014; 7:117134.

34.	 Amith SR, Jayanth P, Franchuk S, Siddiqui S, Seyrantepe
V, Gee K, Basta S, Beyaert R, Pshezhetsky AV and
Szewczuk MR. Dependence of pathogen molecule-induced
toll-like receptor activation and cell function on Neu1
sialidase. Glycoconjugate Journal. 2009; 26(9):1197-1212.

47.	 Hata K, Koseki K, Yamaguchi K, Moriya S, Suzuki Y,
Yingsakmongkon S, Hirai G, Sodeoka M, von Itzstein M
and Miyagi T. Limited inhibitory effects of oseltamivir
and zanamivir on human sialidases. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother. 2008; 52(10):3484-3491.

35.	 Jayanth P, Amith SR, Gee K and Szewczuk MR. Neu1
sialidase and matrix metalloproteinase-9 cross-talk is
essential for neurotrophin activation of Trk receptors and
cellular signaling. Cellular signalling. 2010; 22(8):11931205.

48.	 Nan X, Carubelli I and Stamatos NM. Sialidase expression
in activated human T lymphocytes influences production of
IFN-gamma. J Leukoc Biol. 2007; 81(1):284-296.

36.	 Blanco MJ, Moreno-Bueno G, Sarrio D, Locascio A, Cano
A, Palacios J and Nieto MA. Correlation of Snail expression
with histological grade and lymph node status in breast
carcinomas. Oncogene. 2002; 21(20):3241-3246.

49.	 Lillehoj EP, Hyun SW, Feng C, Zhang L, Liu A, Guang W,
Nguyen C, Luzina IG, Atamas SP, Passaniti A, Twaddell
WS, Puche AC, Wang LX, Cross AS and Goldblum SE.
NEU1 sialidase expressed in human airway epithelia
regulates epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and
MUC1 protein signaling. J Biol Chem. 2012; 287(11):82148231.

37.	 Jorda M, Olmeda D, Vinyals A, Valero E, Cubillo E,
Llorens A, Cano A and Fabra A. Upregulation of MMP9 in MDCK epithelial cell line in response to expression
of the Snail transcription factor. J Cell Sci. 2005; 118(Pt
15):3371-3385.
38.	 Przybylo JA and Radisky DC. Matrix metalloproteinaseinduced epithelial-mesenchymal transition: tumor
progression at Snail’s pace. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2007;
39(6):1082-1088.

50.	 Beguinot L, Lyall RM, Willingham MC and Pastan I.
Down-regulation of the epidermal growth factor receptor in
KB cells is due to receptor internalization and subsequent
degradation in lysosomes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1984;
81(8):2384-2388.

39.	 Bolos V, Peinado H, Perez-Moreno MA, Fraga MF,
Esteller M and Cano A. The transcription factor Slug
represses E-cadherin expression and induces epithelial to
mesenchymal transitions: a comparison with Snail and E47
repressors. J Cell Sci. 2003; 116(Pt 3):499-511.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

51.	 Meuillet EJ, Mania-Farnell B, George D, Inokuchi JI
and Bremer EG. Modulation of EGF receptor activity
by changes in the GM3 content in a human epidermoid
carcinoma cell line, A431. Exp Cell Res. 2000; 256(1):74-

40874

Oncotarget

82.

22(2):314-324.

52.	 Schlessinger J. Cell signaling by receptor tyrosine kinases.
Cell. 2000; 103(2):211-225.

65.	 Abdulkhalek S and Szewczuk MR. Neu1 sialidase and
matrix metalloproteinase-9 cross-talk regulates nucleic acidinduced endosomal TOLL-like receptor-7 and -9 activation,
cellular signaling and pro-inflammatory responses. Cellular
Signalling. 2013; 25(11):2093-2105.

53.	 Ferguson KM. Structure-based view of epidermal growth
factor receptor regulation. Annual review of biophysics.
2008; 37:353-373.

66.	 Pshezhetsky AV and Ashmarina LI. Desialylation of
surface receptors as a new dimension in cell signaling.
Biochemistry (Mosc). 2013; 78(7):736-745.

54.	 Matsunami RK, Yette ML, Stevens A and Niyogi SK.
Mutational analysis of leucine 47 in human epidermal
growth factor. Journal of Cellular Biochemistry. 1991;
46(3):242-249.

67.	 Prelich G. Gene Overexpression: Uses, Mechanisms, and
Interpretation. Genetics. 2012; 190(3):841-854.

55.	 Engler DA, Montelione GT and Niyogi SK. Human
epidermal growth factor. Distinct roles of tyrosine 37 and
arginine 41 in receptor binding as determined by sitedirected mutagenesis and nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy. FEBS letters. 1990; 271(1-2):47-50.

68.	 Frosina G. Overexpression of enzymes that repair
endogenous damage to DNA. European Journal of
Biochemistry. 2000; 267(8):2135-2149.
69.	 Zhao YY, Takahashi M, Gu JG, Miyoshi E, Matsumoto A,
Kitazume S and Taniguchi N. Functional roles of N-glycans
in cell signaling and cell adhesion in cancer. Cancer science.
2008; 99(7):1304-1310.

56.	 Greenfield C, Hiles I, Waterfield MD, Federwisch M,
Wollmer A, Blundell TL and McDonald N. Epidermal
growth factor binding induces a conformational change in
the external domain of its receptor. The EMBO journal.
1989; 8(13):4115-4123.

70.	 Dennis JW, Lau KS, Demetriou M and Nabi IR. Adaptive
regulation at the cell surface by N-glycosylation. Traffic.
2009; 10(11):1569-1578.

57.	 Lemmon MA. Ligand-induced ErbB receptor dimerization.
Experimental Cell Research. 2009; 315(4):638-648.

71.	 Kim K, Mayer EP and Nachtigal M. Galectin-3 expression
in macrophages is signaled by Ras/MAP kinase pathway
and up-regulated by modified lipoproteins. Biochim
Biophys Acta. 2003; 1641(1):13-23.

58.	 Ogiso H, Ishitani R, Nureki O, Fukai S, Yamanaka M,
Kim J-H, Saito K, Sakamoto A, Inoue M, Shirouzu M and
Yokoyama S. Crystal structure of the complex of human
epidermal growth factor and receptor extracellular domains.
Cell. 2002; 110(6):775-787.

72.	 Nangia-Makker P, Balan V and Raz A. Regulation of
tumor progression by extracellular galectin-3. Cancer
microenvironment. 2008; 1(1):43-51.

59.	 Alghamdi F, Guo M, Abdulkhalek S, Crawford N, Amith
SR and Szewczuk MR. A novel insulin receptor-signaling
platform and its link to insulin resistance and type 2
diabetes. Cellular Signalling. 2014; 26(6):1355-1368.

73.	 Dumic J, Dabelic S and Flogel M. Galectin-3: an openended story. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006; 1760(4):616635.

60.	 Haxho F AF, Neufeld RJ, Szewczuk MR. Novel Insulin
Receptor-Signaling Platform. Int J Diabetes Clin Res. 2014;
1(005):1-10.

74.	 Moody TW, Berna MJ, Mantey S, Sancho V, Ridnour
L, Wink DA, Chan D, Giaccone G and Jensen RT.
Neuromedin B receptors regulate EGF receptor tyrosine
phosphorylation in lung cancer cells. Eur J Pharmacol.
2010; 637(1-3):38-45.

61.	 Abdulkhalek S, Amith SR, Franchuk SL, Jayanth P,
Guo M, Finlay T, Gilmour A, Guzzo C, Gee K, Beyaert
R and Szewczuk MR. Neu1 sialidase and matrix
metalloproteinase-9 cross-talk is essential for Toll-like
receptor activation and cellular signaling. J Biol Chem.
2011; 286(42):36532-36549.

75.	 Fischer OM, Hart S and Ullrich A. Dissecting the epidermal
growth factor receptor signal transactivation pathway.
Methods Mol Biol. 2006; 327:85-97.
76.	 Lee M-H and Murphy G. Matrix metalloproteinases at a
glance. J Cell Sci. 2004; 117(18):4015-4016.

62.	 Abdulkhalek S, Guo M, Amith SR, Jayanth P and Szewczuk
MR. G-protein coupled receptor agonists mediate Neu1
sialidase and matrix metalloproteinase-9 cross-talk to
induce transactivation of TOLL-like receptors and cellular
signaling. Cellular signalling. 2012; 24(11):2035-2042.

77.	 Le Gall SM, Auger R, Dreux C and Mauduit P.
Regulated cell surface pro-EGF ectodomain shedding is
a zinc metalloprotease-dependent process. The Journal of
biological chemistry. 2003; 278(46):45255-45268.

63.	 Amith SR, Jayanth P, Finlay T, Franchuk S, Gilmour A,
Abdulkhalek S and Szewczuk MR. Detection of Neu1
sialidase activity in regulating Toll-like receptor activation.
Journal of visualized experiments : JoVE. 2010; (43).

78.	 Murasawa S, Mori Y, Nozawa Y, Gotoh N, Shibuya M,
Masaki H, Maruyama K, Tsutsumi Y, Moriguchi Y,
Shibazaki Y, Tanaka Y, Iwasaka T, Inada M and Matsubara
H. Angiotensin II Type 1 Receptor–Induced Extracellular
Signal–Regulated Protein Kinase Activation Is Mediated by
Ca2+/Calmodulin-Dependent Transactivation of Epidermal
Growth Factor Receptor. Circ Res. 1998; 82(12):13381348.

64.	 Amith SR, Jayanth P, Franchuk S, Finlay T, Seyrantepe
V, Beyaert R, Pshezhetsky AV and Szewczuk MR. Neu1
desialylation of sialyl alpha-2,3-linked beta-galactosyl
residues of TOLL-like receptor 4 is essential for receptor
activation and cellular signaling. Cell Signal. 2010;
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40875

Oncotarget

79.	 Gooz M, Gooz P, Luttrell LM and Raymond JR. 5-HT2A
Receptor Induces ERK Phosphorylation and Proliferation
through ADAM-17 Tumor Necrosis Factor-{alpha}converting Enzyme (TACE) Activation and Heparinbound Epidermal Growth Factor-like Growth Factor (HBEGF) Shedding in Mesangial Cells. J Biol Chem. 2006;
281(30):21004-21012.

92.	 Laferte S, Fukuda MN, Fukuda M, Dell A and Dennis JW.
Glycosphingolipids of lectin-resistant mutants of the highly
metastatic mouse tumor cell line, MDAY-D2. Cancer Res.
1987; 47(1):150-159.

80.	 Prenzel N, Zwick E, Daub H, Leserer M, Abraham R,
Wallasch C and Ullrich A. EGF receptor transactivation
by G-protein-coupled receptors requires metalloproteinase
cleavage of proHB-EGF. Nature. 1999; 402(6764):884-888.

94.	 Collard JG, Schijven JF, Bikker A, La Riviere G, Bolscher
JG and Roos E. Cell surface sialic acid and the invasive
and metastatic potential of T-cell hybridomas. Cancer Res.
1986; 46(7):3521-3527.

81.	 Bosmann HB, Bieber GF, Brown AE, Case KR, Gersten
DM, Kimmerer TW and Lione A. Biochemical parameters
correlated with tumour cell implantation. Nature. 1973;
246(5434):487-489.

95.	 Fogel M, Altevogt P and Schirrmacher V. Metastatic
potential severely altered by changes in tumor cell
adhesiveness and cell-surface sialylation. J Exp Med. 1983;
157(1):371-376.

82.	 Yogeeswaran G and Tao T. Cell surface sialic acid
expression of lectin-resistant variant clones of B16
melanoma with altered metastasizing potential. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun. 1980; 95(4):1452-1460.

96.	 Altevogt P, Fogel M, Cheingsong-Popov R, Dennis J,
Robinson P and Schirrmacher V. Different patterns of lectin
binding and cell surface sialylation detected on related
high- and low-metastatic tumor lines. Cancer Res. 1983;
43(11):5138-5144.

93.	 Dennis JW and Laferte S. Tumor cell surface carbohydrate
and the metastatic phenotype. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 1987;
5(3):185-204.

83.	 Pearlstein E, Salk PL, Yogeeswaran G and Karpatkin S.
Correlation between spontaneous metastatic potential,
platelet-aggregating activity of cell surface extracts, and
cell surface sialylation in 10 metastatic-variant derivatives
of a rat renal sarcoma cell line. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
1980; 77(7):4336-4339.

97.	 Chang WW, Yu CY, Lin TW, Wang PH and Tsai YC.
Soyasaponin I decreases the expression of alpha2,3-linked
sialic acid on the cell surface and suppresses the metastatic
potential of B16F10 melanoma cells. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun. 2006; 341(2):614-619.

84.	 Dobrossy L, Pavelic ZP and Bernacki RJ. A correlation
between cell surface sialyltransferase, sialic acid, and
glycosidase activities and the implantability of B16 murine
melanoma. Cancer Res. 1981; 41(6):2262-2266.

98.	 Takano R, Muchmore E and Dennis JW. Sialylation and
Malignant Potential in Tumor-Cell Glycosylation Mutants.
Glycobiology. 1994; 4(5):665-674.

85.	 Nicolson GL. Tumor progression, oncogenes and the
evolution of metastatic phenotypic diversity. Clin Exp
Metastasis. 1984; 2(2):85-105.

99.	 Cui H, Lin Y, Yue L, Zhao X and Liu J. Differential
expression of the alpha2,3-sialic acid residues in breast
cancer is associated with metastatic potential. Oncol Rep.
2011; 25(5):1365-1371.

86.	 Nakajima M, Irimura T, Di Ferrante N and Nicolson GL.
Metastatic melanoma cell heparanase. Characterization
of heparan sulfate degradation fragments produced by
B16 melanoma endoglucuronidase. J Biol Chem. 1984;
259(4):2283-2290.

100.	Yogeeswaran G and Salk PL. Metastatic potential is
positively correlated with cell surface sialylation of cultured
murine tumor cell lines. Science. 1981; 212(4502):15141516.
101.	Passaniti A and Hart GW. Cell surface sialylation and
tumor metastasis. Metastatic potential of B16 melanoma
variants correlates with their relative numbers of specific
penultimate oligosaccharide structures. J Biol Chem. 1988;
263(16):7591-7603.

87.	 Irimura T and Nicolson GL. Carbohydrate chain analysis by
lectin binding to electrophoretically separated glycoproteins
from murine B16 melanoma sublines of various metastatic
properties. Cancer Res. 1984; 44(2):791-798.
88.	 Nicolson GL. Generation of phenotypic diversity and
progression in metastatic tumor cells. Cancer Metastasis
Rev. 1984; 3(1):25-42.

102.	Sawada M, Moriya S, Saito S, Shineha R, Satomi S, Yamori
T, Tsuruo T, Kannagi R and Miyagi T. Reduced sialidase
expression in highly metastatic variants of mouse colon
adenocarcinoma 26 and retardation of their metastatic
ability by sialidase overexpression. IntJCancer. 2002;
97(2):180-185.

89.	 Nicolson GL. Cell surface molecules and tumor metastasis.
Regulation of metastatic phenotypic diversity. Exp Cell
Res. 1984; 150(1):3-22.
90.	 Nicolson GL and Irimura T. Estimating glycoprotein
carbohydrate chain structures by lectin reactivities in
polyacrylamide gels. Biol Cell. 1984; 51(2):157-164.

103.	Miyagi T, Sato K, Hata K and Taniguchi S. Metastatic
potential of transformed rat 3Y1 cell lines is inversely
correlated with lysosomal-type sialidase activity. FEBS
Lett. 1994; 349(2):255-259.

91.	 Dennis JW, Laferte S, Waghorne C, Breitman ML
and Kerbel RS. Beta 1-6 branching of Asn-linked
oligosaccharides is directly associated with metastasis.
Science. 1987; 236(4801):582-585.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

104.	Park JJ and Lee M. Increasing the alpha 2, 6 sialylation
of glycoproteins may contribute to metastatic spread and
therapeutic resistance in colorectal cancer. Gut Liver. 2013;
40876

Oncotarget

7(6):629-641.

E and Vallejo-Ruiz V. Increased expression of sialic acid
in cervical biopsies with squamous intraepithelial lesions.
Diagn Pathol. 2010; 5:74.

105.	Bull C, Stoel MA, den Brok MH and Adema GJ. Sialic acids
sweeten a tumor’s life. Cancer Res. 2014; 74(12):31993204.

117.	Miyagi T. Aberrant expression of sialidase and cancer
progression. Proceedings of the Japan Academy Series B,
Physical and biological sciences. 2008; 84(10):407-418.

106.	Bull C, den Brok MH and Adema GJ. Sweet escape: sialic
acids in tumor immune evasion. Biochim Biophys Acta.
2014; 1846(1):238-246.

118.	Miyagi T, Wada T, Yamaguchi K and Hata K. Sialidase and
malignancy: A minireview. Glycoconjugate Journal. 2003;
20(3):189-198.

107.	Liu YC, Yen HY, Chen CY, Chen CH, Cheng PF, Juan YH,
Chen CH, Khoo KH, Yu CJ, Yang PC, Hsu TL and Wong
CH. Sialylation and fucosylation of epidermal growth
factor receptor suppress its dimerization and activation
in lung cancer cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011;
108(28):11332-11337.

119.	Miyagi T, Wada T, Yamaguchi K, Hata K and Moriya
S. [Regulation of cellular function by mammalian
sialidase]. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2003; 48(8
Suppl):1033-1040.

108.	Yen HY, Liu YC, Chen NY, Tsai CF, Wang YT, Chen YJ,
Hsu TL, Yang PC and Wong CH. Effect of sialylation on
EGFR phosphorylation and resistance to tyrosine kinase
inhibition. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015; 112(22):69556960.

120.	Monti E, Bonten, Erik, D’Azzo A, Bresciani R, Venerando
B, Borsani G, Schauer R and Tettamanti G. (2010).
Sialidases in Vertebrates: A Family Of Enzymes Tailored
For Several Cell Functions*. In: Derek H, ed. Advances
in Carbohydrate Chemistry and Biochemistry: Academic
Press), pp. 403-479.

109.	Uemura T, Shiozaki K, Yamaguchi K, Miyazaki S, Satomi
S, Kato K, Sakuraba H and Miyagi T. Contribution of
sialidase NEU1 to suppression of metastasis of human
colon cancer cells through desialylation of integrin beta4.
Oncogene. 2009; 28(9):1218-1229.

121.	Miyagi T and Yamaguchi K. Mammalian sialidases:
physiological and pathological roles in cellular functions.
Glycobiology. 2012; 22(7):880-896.
122.	Magesh S, Suzuki T, Miyagi T, Ishida H and Kiso M.
Homology modeling of human sialidase enzymes NEU1,
NEU3 and NEU4 based on the crystal structure of NEU2:
hints for the design of selective NEU3 inhibitors. Journal of
molecular graphics & modelling. 2006; 25(2):196-207.

110.	Sawada M, Moriya S, Saito S, Shineha R, Satomi S, Yamori
T, Tsuruo T, Kannagi R and Miyagi T. Reduced sialidase
expression in highly metastatic variants of mouse colon
adenocarcinoma 26 and retardation of their metastatic
ability by sialidase overexpression. Int J Cancer. 2002;
97(2):180-185.

123.	Liang F, Seyrantepe V, Landry K, Ahmad R, Ahmad
A, Stamatos NM and Pshezhetsky AV. Monocyte
differentiation up-regulates the expression of the lysosomal
sialidase, Neu1, and triggers its targeting to the plasma
membrane via major histocompatibility complex class IIpositive compartments. The Journal of biological chemistry.
2006; 281(37):27526-27538.

111.	Kato T, Wang Y, Yamaguchi K, Milner CM, Shineha R,
Satomi S and Miyagi T. Overexpression of lysosomal-type
sialidase leads to suppression of metastasis associated with
reversion of malignant phenotype in murine B16 melanoma
cells. IntJCancer. 2001; 92(6):797-804.
112.	Haxho F, Allison S, Alghamdi F, Brodhagen L, Kuta VE,
Abdulkhalek S, Neufeld RJ and Szewczuk MR. Oseltamivir
phosphate monotherapy ablates tumor neovascularization,
growth, and metastasis in mouse model of human triplenegative breast adenocarcinoma. Breast Cancer: Targets
and Therapy. 2014; 6:191-203.

124.	Yogalingam G, Bonten EJ, van de Vlekkert D, Hu H,
Moshiach S, Connell SA and d’Azzo A. Neuraminidase 1
is a negative regulator of lysosomal exocytosis. Dev Cell.
2008; 15(1):74-86.
125.	Caciotti A, Donati MA, Boneh A, d’Azzo A, Federico
A, Parini R, Antuzzi D, Bardelli T, Nosi D, Kimonis V,
Zammarchi E and Morrone A. Role of beta-galactosidase
and elastin binding protein in lysosomal and nonlysosomal
complexes of patients with GM1-gangliosidosis. Human
mutation. 2005; 25(3):285-292.

113.	Dall’Olio F, Malagolini N, Trinchera M and Chiricolo M.
Sialosignaling: sialyltransferases as engines of self-fueling
loops in cancer progression. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014;
1840(9):2752-2764.
114.	Ferreira SA, Vasconcelos JL, Silva RC, Cavalcanti CL,
Bezerra CL, Rego MJ and Beltrao EI. Expression patterns
of alpha2,3-sialyltransferase I and alpha2,6-sialyltransferase
I in human cutaneous epithelial lesions. Eur J Histochem.
2013; 57(1):e7.

126.	Lukong KE, Seyrantepe V, Landry K, Trudel S, Ahmad A,
Gahl WA, Lefrancois S, Morales CR and Pshezhetsky AV.
Intracellular distribution of lysosomal sialidase is controlled
by the internalization signal in its cytoplasmic tail. The
Journal of biological chemistry. 2001; 276(49):4617246181.

115.	Wang PH, Li YF, Juang CM, Lee YR, Chao HT,
Tsai YC and Yuan CC. Altered mRNA expression of
sialyltransferase in squamous cell carcinomas of the cervix.
Gynecologic oncology. 2001; 83(1):121-127.

127.	von Minckwitz G, Schneeweiss A, Loibl S, Salat C, Denkert
C, Rezai M, Blohmer JU, Jackisch C, Paepke S, Gerber B,
Zahm DM, Kummel S, Eidtmann H, Klare P, Huober J,
Costa S, et al. Neoadjuvant carboplatin in patients with

116.	Lopez-Morales D, Reyes-Leyva J, Santos-Lopez G, Zenteno
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40877

Oncotarget

triple-negative and HER2-positive early breast cancer
(GeparSixto; GBG 66): a randomised phase 2 trial. The
Lancet Oncology. 2014; 15(7):747-756.

Bergante S, Tringali C, Garatti A, Gelfi C, Venerando B,
Menicanti L, Tettamanti G and Anastasia L. NEU3 sialidase
is activated under hypoxia and protects skeletal muscle
cells from apoptosis through the activation of the epidermal
growth factor receptor signaling pathway and the hypoxiainducible factor (HIF)-1alpha. J Biol Chem. 2013; 288:3153
- 3162.

128.	Chen XP, Enioutina EY and Daynes RA. The control of
IL-4 gene expression in activated murine T lymphocytes:
a novel role for neu-1 sialidase. J Immunol. 1997;
158(7):3070-3080.

139.	Yoshizumi S, Suzuki S, Hirai M, Hinokio Y, Yamada T,
Yamada T, Tsunoda U, Aburatani H, Yamaguchi K, Miyagi
T and Oka Y. Increased hepatic expression of gangliosidespecific sialidase, NEU3, improves insulin sensitivity
and glucose tolerance in mice. Metabolism: clinical and
experimental. 2007; 56(3):420-429.

129.	Koseki K, Wada T, Hosono M, Hata K, Yamaguchi K, Nitta
K and Miyagi T. Human cytosolic sialidase NEU2-low
general tissue expression but involvement in PC-3 prostate
cancer cell survival. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012;
428(1):142-149.
130.	Sato K and Miyagi T. Involvement of an endogenous
sialidase in skeletal muscle cell differentiation.
BiochemBiophysResCommun. 1996; 221(3):826-830.

140.	Miyata M, Kambe M, Tajima O, Moriya S, Sawaki H,
Hotta H, Kondo Y, Narimatsu H, Miyagi T, Furukawa
K and Furukawa K. Membrane sialidase NEU3 is highly
expressed in human melanoma cells promoting cell growth
with minimal changes in the composition of gangliosides.
Cancer science. 2011; 102:2139 - 2149.

131.	Miyagi T and Tsuiki S. Purification and characterization
of cytosolic sialidase from rat liver. JBiolChem. 1985;
260(11):6710-6716.
132.	Kotani K, Kuroiwa A, Saito T, Matsuda Y, Koda T and
Kijimoto-Ochiai S. Cloning, chromosomal mapping,
and characteristic 5’-UTR sequence of murine cytosolic
sialidase. BiochemBiophysResCommun. 2001; 286(2):250258.

141.	Tringali C, Silvestri I, Testa F, Baldassari P, Anastasia L,
Mortarini R, Anichini A, Lopez-Requena A, Tettamanti
G and Venerando B. Molecular subtyping of metastatic
melanoma based on cell ganglioside metabolism profiles.
BMC cancer. 2014; 14(1):560.

133.	Fanzani A, Giuliani R, Colombo F, Rossi S, Stoppani E,
Martinet W, Preti A and Marchesini S. The enzymatic
activity of sialidase Neu2 is inversely regulated during in
vitro myoblast hypertrophy and atrophy. Biochem Biophys
Res Commun. 2008; 370(2):376-381.

142.	Yamaguchi K, Koseki K, Shiozaki M, Shimada Y, Wada T
and Miyagi T. Regulation of plasma-membrane-associated
sialidase NEU3 gene by Sp1/Sp3 transcription factors.
Biochem J. 2010; 430:107 - 117.
143.	Yamanami H, Shiozaki K, Wada T, Yamaguchi K, Uemura
T, Kakugawa Y, Hujiya T and Miyagi T. Down-regulation
of sialidase NEU4 may contribute to invasive properties of
human colon cancers. Cancer science. 2007; 98(3):299-307.

134.	Chavas LM, Tringali C, Fusi P, Venerando B, Tettamanti
G, Kato R, Monti E and Wakatsuki S. Crystal structure
of the human cytosolic sialidase Neu2. Evidence for the
dynamic nature of substrate recognition. JBiolChem. 2005;
280(1):469-475.

144.	Finlay TM, Abdulkhalek S, Gilmour A, Guzzo C, Jayanth
P, Amith SR, Gee K, Beyaert R and Szewczuk MR.
Thymoquinone-induced Neu4 sialidase activates NFκB in
macrophage cells and pro-inflammatory cytokines in vivo.
Glycoconjugate Journal. 2010; 27(6):583-600.

135.	Anastasia L, Papini N, Colazzo F, Palazzolo G, Tringali
C, Dileo L, Piccoli M, Conforti E, Sitzia C, Monti E,
Sampaolesi M, Tettamanti G and Venerando B. NEU3
sialidase strictly modulates GM3 levels in skeletal
myoblasts C2C12 thus favoring their differentiation
and protecting them from apoptosis. J Biol Chem. 2008;
283(52):36265-36271.

145.	Finlay TM, Jayanth P, Amith SR, Gilmour A, Guzzo C,
Gee K, Beyaert R and Szewczuk MR. Thymoquinone from
nutraceutical black cumin oil activates Neu4 sialidase in
live macrophage, dendritic, and normal and type I sialidosis
human fibroblast cells via GPCR Galphai proteins and
matrix metalloproteinase-9. Glycoconjugate Journal. 2010;
27(3):329-348.

136.	Azuma Y, Sato H, Higai K and Matsumoto K. Enhanced
expression of membrane-associated sialidase Neu3
decreases GD3 and increases GM3 on the surface of Jurkat
cells during etoposide-induced apoptosis. Biol Pharm Bull.
2007; 30(9):1680-1684.

146.	Miyagi T, Takahashi K, Hata K, Shiozaki K and Yamaguchi
K. Sialidase significance for cancer progression. Glycoconj
J. 2012; 29(8-9):567-577.

137.	Papini N, Anastasia L, Tringali C, Croci G, Bresciani R,
Yamaguchi K, Miyagi T, Preti A, Prinetti A, Prioni S,
Sonnino S, Tettamanti G, Venerando B and Monti E. The
plasma membrane-associated sialidase MmNEU3 modifies
the ganglioside pattern of adjacent cells supporting its
involvement in cell-to-cell interactions. J Biol Chem. 2004;
279(17):16989-16995.

147.	Patel TB. Single Transmembrane Spanning Heterotrimeric
G Protein-Coupled Receptors and Their Signaling
Cascades. Pharmacological reviews. 2004; 56(3):371-385.
148.	Fischoeder A, Meyborg H, Stibenz D, Fleck E, Graf K and
Stawowy P. Insulin augments matrix metalloproteinase-9
expression in monocytes. Cardiovasc Res. 2007; 73(4):841848.

138.	Scaringi R, Piccoli M, Papini N, Cirillo F, Conforti E,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40878

Oncotarget

149.	Karoor V, Wang L, Wang HY and Malbon CC. Insulin
stimulates sequestration of beta-adrenergic receptors and
enhanced association of beta-adrenergic receptors with
Grb2 via tyrosine 350. J Biol Chem. 1998; 273(49):3303533041.

cancer. Cancer Res. 2009; 69(14):5820-5828.
161.	Yang AD, Fan F, Camp ER, van Buren G, Liu W, Somcio
R, Gray MJ, Cheng H, Hoff PM and Ellis LM. Chronic
oxaliplatin resistance induces epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition in colorectal cancer cell lines. Clinical cancer
research. 2006; 12(14 Pt 1):4147-4153.

150.	Karoor V and Malbon CC. Insulin-like growth factor
receptor-1 stimulates phosphorylation of the beta2adrenergic receptor in vivo on sites distinct from those
phosphorylated in response to insulin. J Biol Chem. 1996;
271(46):29347-29352.

162.	Rho JK, Choi YJ, Lee JK, Ryoo BY, Na, II, Yang SH,
Kim CH and Lee JC. Epithelial to mesenchymal transition
derived from repeated exposure to gefitinib determines the
sensitivity to EGFR inhibitors in A549, a non-small cell
lung cancer cell line. Lung cancer. 2009; 63(2):219-226.

151.	Baltensperger K, Karoor V, Paul H, Ruoho A, Czech MP
and Malbon CC. The beta-adrenergic receptor is a substrate
for the insulin receptor tyrosine kinase. J Biol Chem. 1996;
271(2):1061-1064.

163.	Zavadil J and Bottinger EP. TGF-beta and epithelial-tomesenchymal transitions. Oncogene. 2005; 24(37):57645774.

152.	Karoor V, Baltensperger K, Paul H, Czech MP and Malbon
CC. Phosphorylation of tyrosyl residues 350/354 of the
beta-adrenergic receptor is obligatory for counterregulatory
effects of insulin. J Biol Chem. 1995; 270(43):2530525308.

164.	Allington TM and Schiemann WP. The Cain and Abl of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition and transforming growth
factor-beta in mammary epithelial cells. Cells Tissues
Organs. 2011; 193(1-2):98-113.
165.	Tian M, Neil JR and Schiemann WP. Transforming growth
factor-beta and the hallmarks of cancer. Cell Signal. 2011;
23(6):951-962.

153.	Pyne NJ and Pyne S. Receptor tyrosine kinase-G-proteincoupled receptor signalling platforms: out of the shadow?
Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2011; 32(8):443-450.

166.	Wendt MK, Smith JA and Schiemann WP. Transforming
growth factor-beta-induced epithelial-mesenchymal
transition facilitates epidermal growth factor-dependent
breast cancer progression. Oncogene. 2010; 29(49):64856498.

154.	Liu D, Zhang Y, Dang C, Ma Q, Lee W and Chen W.
siRNA directed against TrkA sensitizes human pancreatic
cancer cells to apoptosis induced by gemcitabine through
an inactivation of PI3K/Akt-dependent pathway. Oncology
reports. 2007; 18(3):673-677.
155.	Maehara S, Tanaka S, Shimada M, Shirabe K, Saito Y,
Takahashi K and Maehara Y. Selenoprotein P, as a predictor
for evaluating gemcitabine resistance in human pancreatic
cancer cells. Int J Cancer. 2004; 112(2):184-189.

167.	Taylor MA, Parvani JG and Schiemann WP. The
pathophysiology of epithelial-mesenchymal transition
induced by transforming growth factor-beta in normal and
malignant mammary epithelial cells. Journal of mammary
gland biology and neoplasia. 2010; 15(2):169-190.

156.	Shah AN, Summy JM, Zhang J, Park SI, Parikh NU
and Gallick GE. Development and characterization of
gemcitabine-resistant pancreatic tumor cells. Annals of
surgical oncology. 2007; 14(12):3629-3637.

168.	Nagaraj NS and Datta PK. Targeting the transforming
growth factor-beta signaling pathway in human cancer.
Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2010; 19(1):77-91.
169.	Katoh Y and Katoh M. Hedgehog signaling, epithelial-tomesenchymal transition and miRNA (review). Int J Mol
Med. 2008; 22(3):271-275.

157.	Kabashima A, Higuchi H, Takaishi H, Matsuzaki Y,
Suzuki S, Izumiya M, Iizuka H, Sakai G, Hozawa S,
Azuma T and Hibi T. Side population of pancreatic cancer
cells predominates in TGF-beta-mediated epithelial to
mesenchymal transition and invasion. Int J Cancer. 2009;
124(12):2771-2779.

170.	Olive KP, Jacobetz MA, Davidson CJ, Gopinathan A,
McIntyre D, Honess D, Madhu B, Goldgraben MA,
Caldwell ME, Allard D, Frese KK, Denicola G, Feig C,
Combs C, Winter SP, Ireland-Zecchini H, et al. Inhibition
of Hedgehog signaling enhances delivery of chemotherapy
in a mouse model of pancreatic cancer. Science. 2009;
324(5933):1457-1461.

158.	Konecny GE, Venkatesan N, Yang G, Dering J, Ginther C,
Finn R, Rahmeh M, Fejzo MS, Toft D, Jiang SW, Slamon
DJ and Podratz KC. Activity of lapatinib a novel HER2 and
EGFR dual kinase inhibitor in human endometrial cancer
cells. British journal of cancer. 2008; 98(6):1076-1084.

171.	Oliveira-Cunha M, Newman WG and Siriwardena AK.
Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor in Pancreatic Cancer.
Cancers. 2011; 3(2):1513-1526.

159.	Creighton CJ, Gibbons DL and Kurie JM. The role of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition programming in invasion
and metastasis: a clinical perspective. Cancer management
and research. 2013; 5:187-195.

172.	Chang ZG, Wei JM, Qin CF, Hao K, Tian XD, Xie K, Xie
XH and Yang YM. Suppression of the epidermal growth
factor receptor inhibits epithelial-mesenchymal transition in
human pancreatic cancer PANC-1 cells. Dig Dis Sci. 2012;
57(5):1181-1189.

160.	Arumugam T, Ramachandran V, Fournier KF, Wang H,
Marquis L, Abbruzzese JL, Gallick GE, Logsdon CD,
McConkey DJ and Choi W. Epithelial to mesenchymal
transition contributes to drug resistance in pancreatic
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

173.	Danilov AV, Neupane D, Nagaraja AS, Feofanova EV,
Humphries LA, DiRenzo J and Korc M. DeltaNp63alpha40879

Oncotarget

mediated induction of epidermal growth factor
receptor promotes pancreatic cancer cell growth and
chemoresistance. PLoS One. 2011; 6(10):e26815.

metalloproteinase inhibitors and cancer: trials and
tribulations. Science. 2002; 295(5564):2387-2392.
188.	Karin M and Greten FR. NF-kappaB: linking inflammation
and immunity to cancer development and progression. Nat
Rev Immunol. 2005; 5(10):749-759.

174.	Sette G, Salvati V, Memeo L, Fecchi K, Colarossi C, Di
Matteo P, Signore M, Biffoni M, D’Andrea V, De Antoni E,
Canzonieri V, De Maria R and Eramo A. EGFR inhibition
abrogates leiomyosarcoma cell chemoresistance through
inactivation of survival pathways and impairment of CSC
potential. PLoS One. 2012; 7(10):e46891.

189.	Lin EY, Nguyen AV, Russell RG and Pollard JW. Colonystimulating factor 1 promotes progression of mammary
tumors to malignancy. J Exp Med. 2001; 193(6):727-740.
190.	Lin EY, Li JF, Gnatovskiy L, Deng Y, Zhu L, Grzesik DA,
Qian H, Xue XN and Pollard JW. Macrophages regulate
the angiogenic switch in a mouse model of breast cancer.
Cancer Res. 2006; 66(23):11238-11246.

175.	Holz C, Niehr F, Boyko M, Hristozova T, Distel L, Budach
V and Tinhofer I. Epithelial-mesenchymal-transition
induced by EGFR activation interferes with cell migration
and response to irradiation and cetuximab in head and neck
cancer cells. Radiotherapy and oncology : journal of the
European Society for Therapeutic Radiology and Oncology.
2011; 101(1):158-164.

191.	Mantovani A, Sica A, Sozzani S, Allavena P, Vecchi A
and Locati M. The chemokine system in diverse forms
of macrophage activation and polarization. Trends in
immunology. 2004; 25(12):677-686.

176.	Faller BA and Burtness B. Treatment of pancreatic cancer
with epidermal growth factor receptor-targeted therapy.
Biologics : targets & therapy. 2009; 3:419-428.

192.	Mantovani A, Sozzani S, Locati M, Allavena P and Sica A.
Macrophage polarization: tumor-associated macrophages
as a paradigm for polarized M2 mononuclear phagocytes.
Trends in immunology. 2002; 23(11):549-555.

177.	Voulgari A and Pintzas A. Epithelial–mesenchymal
transition in cancer metastasis: Mechanisms, markers
and strategies to overcome drug resistance in the clinic.
Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Reviews on
Cancer. 2009; 1796(2):75-90.
178.	Thiery JP, Acloque H, Huang RY and Nieto MA. Epithelialmesenchymal transitions in development and disease. Cell.
2009; 139(5):871-890.

193.	Biswas SK, Gangi L, Paul S, Schioppa T, Saccani A,
Sironi M, Bottazzi B, Doni A, Vincenzo B, Pasqualini
F, Vago L, Nebuloni M, Mantovani A and Sica A. A
distinct and unique transcriptional program expressed by
tumor-associated macrophages (defective NF-kappaB
and enhanced IRF-3/STAT1 activation). Blood. 2006;
107(5):2112-2122.

179.	Hendrix MJ, Seftor EA, Meltzer PS, Gardner LM, Hess
AR, Kirschmann DA, Schatteman GC and Seftor RE.
Expression and functional significance of VE-cadherin in
aggressive human melanoma cells: role in vasculogenic
mimicry. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001; 98(14):80188023.

194.	Saccani A, Schioppa T, Porta C, Biswas SK, Nebuloni
M, Vago L, Bottazzi B, Colombo MP, Mantovani A and
Sica A. p50 nuclear factor-kappaB overexpression in
tumor-associated macrophages inhibits M1 inflammatory
responses and antitumor resistance. Cancer Res. 2006;
66(23):11432-11440.

180.	Nath S, Daneshvar K, Roy LD, Grover P, Kidiyoor A,
Mosley L, Sahraei M and Mukherjee P. MUC1 induces
drug resistance in pancreatic cancer cells via upregulation
of multidrug resistance genes. Oncogenesis. 2013; 2:e51.

195.	Zitvogel L, Tesniere A and Kroemer G. Cancer
despite immunosurveillance: immunoselection and
immunosubversion. Nat Rev Immunol. 2006; 6(10):715727.

181.	Balkwill F, Charles KA and Mantovani A. Smoldering and
polarized inflammation in the initiation and promotion of
malignant disease. Cancer Cell. 2005; 7(3):211-217.

196.	Dinapoli MR, Calderon CL and Lopez DM. The altered
tumoricidal capacity of macrophages isolated from tumorbearing mice is related to reduce expression of the inducible
nitric oxide synthase gene. J Exp Med. 1996; 183(4):13231329.

182.	Coussens LM and Werb Z. Inflammation and cancer.
Nature. 2002; 420(6917):860-867.
183.	Karin M. Nuclear factor-kappaB in cancer development and
progression. Nature. 2006; 441(7092):431-436.

197.	Sica A, Saccani A, Bottazzi B, Polentarutti N, Vecchi A,
van Damme J and Mantovani A. Autocrine production of
IL-10 mediates defective IL-12 production and NF-kappa
B activation in tumor-associated macrophages. J Immunol.
2000; 164(2):762-767.

184.	Karin M. NF-kappaB and cancer: mechanisms and targets.
Mol Carcinog. 2006; 45(6):355-361.
185.	Karin M. Tracking the road from inflammation to cancer:
the critical role of IkappaB kinase (IKK). Harvey lectures.
2006; 102:133-151.

198.	Wagner S, Czub S, Greif M, Vince GH, Suss N, Kerkau
S, Rieckmann P, Roggendorf W, Roosen K and Tonn JC.
Microglial/macrophage expression of interleukin 10 in
human glioblastomas. Int J Cancer. 1999; 82(1):12-16.

186.	Karin M, Lawrence T and Nizet V. Innate immunity gone
awry: linking microbial infections to chronic inflammation
and cancer. Cell. 2006; 124(4):823-835.

199.	Pollard JW. Tumour-educated macrophages promote
tumour progression and metastasis. Nat Rev Cancer. 2004;
4(1):71-78.

187.	Coussens LM, Fingleton B and Matrisian LM. Matrix

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40880

Oncotarget

200.	Lewis CE and Pollard JW. Distinct role of macrophages
in different tumor microenvironments. Cancer Res. 2006;
66(2):605-612.

206.	Abdulkhalek S, Olivia Geen, Lacey Brodhagen, Fiona
Haxho, Farah Alghamdi, Stephanie Allison, Duncan
Simmons, Leah O’Shea, Ronald J Neufeld, and Myron
R Szewczuk Transcriptional factor Snail controls tumor
neovascularization, growth and metastasis in mouse model
of human ovarian carcinoma Clinical and Translational
Medicine. 2014; 3.

201.	Biswas SK, Sica A and Lewis CE. Plasticity of macrophage
function during tumor progression: regulation by distinct
molecular mechanisms. J Immunol. 2008; 180(4):20112017.

207.	Rastelli F, Biancanelli S, Falzetta A, Martignetti A, Casi
C, Bascioni R, Giustini L and Crispino S. Triple-negative
breast cancer: current state of the art. Tumori. 2010;
96(6):875-888.

202.	Zha YH, He JF, Mei YW, Yin T and Mao L. Zinc-finger
transcription factor snail accelerates survival, migration and
expression of matrix metalloproteinase-2 in human bone
mesenchymal stem cells. Cell biology international. 2007;
31(10):1089-1096.

208.	Goumans MJ, Lebrin F and Valdimarsdottir G.
Controlling the angiogenic switch: a balance between two
distinct TGF-b receptor signaling pathways. Trends in
cardiovascular medicine. 2003; 13(7):301-307.

203.	Bergers G, Brekken R, McMahon G, Vu TH, Itoh T,
Tamaki K, Tanzawa K, Thorpe P, Itohara S, Werb Z
and Hanahan D. Matrix metalloproteinase-9 triggers the
angiogenic switch during carcinogenesis. Nat Cell Biol.
2000; 2(10):737-744.

209.	Pinhal-Enfield G, Ramanathan M, Hasko G, Vogel SN,
Salzman AL, Boons GJ and Leibovich SJ. An angiogenic
switch in macrophages involving synergy between Tolllike receptors 2, 4, 7, and 9 and adenosine A(2A) receptors.
AmJPathol. 2003; 163(2):711-721.

204.	Wang Z, Li Y, Kong D, Banerjee S, Ahmad A, Azmi
AS, Ali S, Abbruzzese JL, Gallick GE and Sarkar FH.
Acquisition of epithelial-mesenchymal transition phenotype
of gemcitabine-resistant pancreatic cancer cells is linked
with activation of the notch signaling pathway. Cancer Res.
2009; 69(6):2400-2407.
205.	Merdad A, Karim S, Schulten HJ, Dallol A, Buhmeida A,
Al-Thubaity F, Gari MA, Chaudhary AG, Abuzenadah
AM and Al-Qahtani MH. Expression of matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) in primary human breast
cancer: MMP-9 as a potential biomarker for cancer invasion
and metastasis. Anticancer Res. 2014; 34(3):1355-1366.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40881

Oncotarget

