The awards, which provide $1.5 million in direct costs for
a 5-year project, enable unusual ﬂexibility, says Dr. Basavappa.
Researchers receive the entire sum in the ﬁrst year, enabling
them to spend the funds as they see ﬁt during the grant period.
Both Drs. Yang and Janelsins are pleased to have
received grants that will help them continue their research
into combatting cancer and the side eﬀects of treatment,
respectively.

Cognitive Issues Related to Chemotherapy

NIH Program Encourages
Early-Career Researchers
Innovative researchers delve into ways to
attack cancer, reduce side effects of
chemotherapy.

M

ichelle Janelsins, PhD, MPH, is exploring the causes and
potential solutions to the cognitive problems associated
with chemotherapy, often referred to as “chemo brain.” On the
other side of the country, Lili Yang, PhD, is investigating new
ways to genetically engineer special killer immune cells to attack
cancer.
Both researchers are among 50 recipients of the 2014
National Institutes of Health (NIH) Director’s New Innovator
Awards, announced in October 2014. The program was
developed in 2007 as a way to support exceptionally creative
investigators in the early stages of their careers who propose
to pursue unusually innovative research with broad potential
impact.
“The purpose is two-fold,” says Ravi Basavappa, PhD,
program director for the award program. “First, it is to provide
opportunities for advancing science in leaps rather than the
more typical incremental steps, and second, it is to provide
a complement to other NIH eﬀorts to support early-career
investigators.”

Cancer
CANCER

February 15, 2015
FEBRUARY 15, 2015

“One of the questions I ask myself is why they picked me,”
says Dr. Janelsins, an assistant professor at the University of
Rochester Medical Center in New York. “And I think one of
the strengths I have is training in both basic science and clinical
research.” Indeed, her project addresses both areas in an attempt
to understand the causes of and possible interventions for
cognitive problems related to chemotherapy in patients with
breast cancer.
These problems generally manifest themselves as diﬃculty
with memory, attention, concentration, and organization, and
they can occur during and after treatment. They also can persist
for years, come and go, and vary in severity at diﬀerent times.
One hypothesis is that both chemotherapy and the disease itself
contribute to cognitive problems, she says. “The majority of
these problems will go away, but there is a subset of patients
who will have long-term issues,” Dr. Janelsins says.

There have been clinical studies
about physical activity, but one of
the key reasons why we’re doing
the research in animal models
is because I’m also interested in
learning about the minimal possible dose we can give a patient.
—Michelle Janelsins, PhD, MPH
Her research involves ﬁrst understanding the mechanisms
driving this cognitive impairment in an animal model.
Next, using these pathways as a guide, she hopes to develop
interventions that could lead to human clinical research studies.
“It looks like inﬂammation is playing a role, but we don’t know
if it’s a causative role or more of an association,” she says.
She hopes that her research can help identify a collection of
inﬂammation biomarkers that could identify which patients are
likely to develop cognitive impairment. If these patients can be
identiﬁed, scientists potentially could develop early psychological
testing or interventions to prevent them from experiencing
severe or long-term cognitive issues. Such interventions could
487
1

© CIFOTART / FOTOLIA.COM

Oncology Issues in Focus | BY CARRIE PRINTZ

include both behavioral and pharmacological methods, such
as physical activity, vitamin supplements, or antiinﬂammatory
agents, she says.
“There have been clinical studies about physical activity,
but one of the key reasons why we’re doing the research in
animal models is because I’m also interested in learning about
the minimal possible dose we can give a patient,” she says. “We
don’t know if there’s a diﬀerence between exercising 2 days a
week versus walking every day.”
Dr. Janelsins, who has conducted research in this area for the
past 5 to 6 years, has always focused on cognition and immune
function. Her previous work dealt with Alzheimer disease, but
because several friends and family members were diagnosed
with cancer, she decided to switch scientiﬁc paths. Although
the funding diﬃculties associated with medical research remain
challenging, she believes that “the key is to have innovative ideas
that are clinically relevant.”

Genetic Engineering of Blood Stem Cells
Dr. Yang, an assistant professor of microbiology, immunology,
and molecular genetics at the University of California at Los
Angeles (UCLA), is applying genetic engineering methods in
blood stem cells to generate therapeutic levels of special types of
immune cells known as invariant natural killer T cells
“These cells exist in extremely low numbers in humans and
are highly variable between individuals,” she says, noting that
the numbers can vary from 1 in 100,000 to 1 in 100 in human
blood. “They are very rare, but very potent.” Unlike conventional
T cells, they can begin to attack disease immediately on
activation. They also are considered universal agents because

Likely, the most effective immunotherapy for targeting cancer will
be a combination therapy with
more than one component of the
immune system—Lili Yang, PhD
they can target multiple types of cancers, says Dr. Yang,
Her research is building on her past work in genetically
engineering human blood stem cells to become normal T cells.
Now, she and her colleagues hope to develop ways to generate
and increase the numbers of invariant natural killer T cells in
patients, with the goal of maintaining those numbers throughout
a lifetime. Her project will include proof-of-principle studies in
a mouse model, followed by directly proving the method using
human blood stem cells in a mouse model.
“Likely, the most eﬀective immunotherapy for targeting
cancer will be a combination therapy with more than one
component of the immune system,” Dr. Yang says.
Trained as an immunologist, she received her doctorate
at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena before
moving to UCLA, which is conducting clinical trials in the
method she developed of genetically engineering T cells.
Although the national funding environment for research is
challenging, she credits both UCLA for supporting junior faculty
as well as the California Institute for Regenerative Medicine in
San Francisco for helping fund her stem cell research along with
the NIH New Innovator grant.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29268

Cancer Programs Develop
Own Guidelines to Measure
Quality
n increasing number of cancer programs are developing
their own guidelines to measure and track the quality
of care provided, rather than waiting to be told to do so by
payers, according to a survey conducted by the Association of
Community Cancer Centers.
The organization’s annual survey of trends in cancer
programs found that, although the use of metrics to track and
measure quality is increasing, only 28% of respondents say that
their payers require quality measures. Nevertheless, the majority
of respondents believe that requirement will happen in the
future. Approximately 24% of survey respondents report that
they are involved with an accountable care organization that
has an oncology component, which is up from 5% in 2013.
Another 22% of oncology providers say they plan to participate
in an accountable care organization in the future.
In addition, an increasing number of cancer programs are
working to ensure they are ready for the American College of

488

Surgeons Commission on Cancer standards, which go into
eﬀect in 2015, including requirements involving palliative
care, clinical trials, patient navigation, cancer survivorship,
and genetic counseling. Patient-centered care also is leading
to an increase in the number of supportive services being
oﬀered, the survey found. These services include integrative
and complementary therapies as well as ﬁnancial advocacy.
Regarding the latter, approximately 90% of respondents note
that they oﬀer ﬁnancial assistance services whereas 84% say they
have ﬁnancial specialists on staﬀ.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29269

Cancer

February 15, 2015

© ROB BYRON / FOTOLIA.COM

A

