Original Article

Small Interfering RNA-Mediated
Down-Regulation of SPAG9 Inhibits
Cervical Tumor Growth
Manoj Garg, PhD1; Deepika Kanojia, MSc1; Sushma Suri, MD2; and Anil Suri, PhD1

BACKGROUND: The expression of the SPAG9 is associated with various human malignancies. Earlier work
revealed a significant association of SPAG9 expression with the early spread of cervical cancer, making it
an attractive therapeutic target. Here, the authors investigated the role of SPAG9 in carcinogenesis of
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the cervix. Furthermore, they sought to determine whether ablation of
SPAG9 expression reduces the tumor growth of cervical SCC in vivo. METHODS: A plasmid-based small
interfering RNA approach was used to specifically knock down the expression of SPAG9 in SiHa cells
derived from SCC of the cervix in vitro and in vivo. Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction, immunofluorescence staining, flow cytometry, cellular growth, colony formation, migration, invasion, and wound
healing assays were studied to characterize SPAG9 in vitro. Furthermore, a cervical cancer xenograft model
in nude mice was established to investigate whether knockdown of SPAG9 reduces the tumor growth of
cervical SCC in vivo. RESULTS: The results demonstrated that silencing the SPAG9 by small interfering RNA
resulted in inhibition of cell growth, colony formation, migration, and invasion. The authors showed for the
first time that the knockdown of SPAG9 expression by small interfering RNA significantly suppressed the
tumor growth of cervical SCC in vivo. CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that SPAG9 expression may
play a pivotal role in tumor growth and could contribute to the early spread of cervical cancer. Small interfering RNA-mediated down-regulation of SPAG9 represents a promising therapeutic approach for the
C 2009 American Cancer Society.
treatment of cervical cancer. Cancer 2009;115:5688–99. V
KEY WORDS: SPAG9, tumor motility, invasion, metastasis, gene silencing.

Cervical cancer is the second most common malignancy and is a leading cause of death among women
worldwide.1 In developing countries, nearly 80% of the cases arise because of unavailability of effective
screening systems and limited awareness, resources, and medical support.2 The cervical cancer progression
from preinvasive to invasive disease is a major challenge to clinical intervention. In this regard, efforts have
been made to understand the principles of malignant transformation and tumorigenesis, as this may provide better insight into the process of cancer development and/or tumor suppression.3 Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the cervix is the most frequent malignancy among women and constitutes 80% to 90%
of total cervical cancer occurrence.1 Thus, the inhibition of invasion and metastasis is of great importance
in SCC therapies.
Corresponding author: Anil Suri, PhD, Convener, Cancer Research Program, Cancer Microarray, Genes and Proteins Laboratory, National Institute of
Immunology, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi 110067, India; anil@nii.res.in
1
Cancer Microarray, Genes and Proteins Laboratory, National Institute of Immunology, New Delhi, India; 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Safdarjung Hospital and Vardhman Mahavir Medical College, New Delhi, India

Received: January 8, 2009; Revised: February 24, 2009; Accepted: March 2, 2009
Published online October 7, 2009 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com)
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.24658, www.interscience.wiley.com

5688

Cancer

December 15, 2009

SPAG9 Is Involved in Cellular Motility/Garg et al

The information available so far indicates that invasion and metastasis is to a large extent attributable to the
ability of cells to migrate.4 Over the past decade, there has
been progress in the identification of tumor-associated
proteins contributing to migratory and invasive properties
of tumor cells. In this regard, a unique class of testis proteins, known as cancer testis antigens, are reported to be
expressed in a wide range of human tumors.5,6 It has also
been proposed that the aberrant expression of cancer testis
antigens in tumors may contribute to various malignant
properties, such as immortality, migration, invasion, and
metastatic capacity.7 Down-regulation of cancer testis
antigen expression in tumor cells might therefore provide
an efficient measure to deal with tumor progression.
Recently, we characterized the SPAG9 gene, a new
member of the cancer test is antigen family associated with
various histotypes of epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC),8 renal
cell carcinoma (RCC),9 breast cancer,10 and cervical cancer.11 In addition, gene expression microarray analysis has
also reported SPAG9 gene expression in cervical carcinoma
cells,12 breast tumors,13 dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans,14
and esophageal adenocarcinoma,15 along with other important and well-studied genes. In addition, our recent study in
RCC cells demonstrated that the knockdown of SPAG9
expression with specific small interfering RNA significantly
reduced cellular motility and inhibited tumor growth.9
Although a correlation between SPAG9 expression and
the early spread of cervical cancer was observed,11 our recent
data in EOC,8 RCC,9 and breast cancer10 indicated that
SPAG9 may serve as a potential therapeutic target for early
stage human tumors. Therefore, in the present study, we used
a small interfering RNA approach to selectively knock down
the expression of SPAG9 in SiHa tumor cells to confirm the
association of SPAG9 with cervical carcinogenesis.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell Cultures and Transient Transfections
Four human cervical cancer cell lines, SiHa (squamous
cell carcinoma of cervix), HeLa (adenocarcinoma of
cervix), CaSki (epidermoid carcinoma of cervix), and C33A (carcinoma of cervix) were used in the study. The
HeLa cell line was procured from American Type Culture
Collection (Manassas, Va) and the CaSki, SiHa, and C33A cell lines were gifts from Dr. Nicholas Denko (School
Cancer

December 15, 2009

of Medicine, Stanford University, Palo Alto, Calif). All
cancer cells were cultured in recommended medium
under standard conditions and were transfected using the
transfection reagent Lipofectamine (Invitrogen, Life
Technologies, Carlbad, Calif), as described previously.9
RNA Isolation and Reverse Transcriptase
Polymerase Chain Reaction Analysis
Total RNA from all cervical cancer cells was prepared
using the reagent TRI (Ambion, Inc., Austin, Tex),
according to the manufacturer’s protocol and amplified
with SPAG9-specific primers, as described earlier.9 The
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products were electrophoresed on 1% agarose gels containing ethidium bromide and photographed under ultraviolet light. b-Actin
was used as an internal control in each reaction. The PCR
products were cloned into TOPO vector (Invitrogen) to
confirm the DNA sequence.
Immunofluorescence and Flow
Cytometric Analysis
For immunofluorescence assay, cervical cancer cells were
harvested and analyzed for SPAG9 localization using antiSPAG9 antibody or control immunoglobulin (Ig) G, as
described earlier.8 Briefly, fixed and permeabilized or live
cancer cells were incubated with anti-SPAG9 antibody,
followed by antirat IgG fluorescein isothiocyanate conjugate as secondary antibody (Jackson ImmunoResearch,
West Grove, Pa). The slides were subsequently washed,
mounted in glycerol/phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)
(9:1) and observed under a Nikon Eclipse E 400 microscope (Nikon, Fukok, Japan). Flow cytometric analysis
was carried out on cancer cells using anti-SPAG9 antibody, as previously described.8 Data acquisition and analysis were done using WinMDI (version 2.8; Purdue
University, West Lafayette, Ind) software. Side scatter versus forward scatter gate analysis was done in all cell lines.
Cells stained with secondary antibody only were used to
account for the background fluorescence.
Analysis of RNA Interference Activity
The BS/U6 vector was used to construct SPAG9 small interfering RNA (SPAG9 small interfering RNA and SPAG9
small interfering RNA-I) and control small interfering
RNA (scrambled SPAG9), as described previously.16 SiHa
5689

Original Article

cells, SCC-derived cervical cancer cells, were used to determine small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of
SPAG9. Briefly, cells were seeded at a density of 5  105
in a 35-mm dish plate and cultured for 16 hours. At 60%
confluency, cells were transfected with 6 lg of SPAG9 small
interfering RNA, SPAG9 small interfering RNA-I, or control small interfering RNA plasmids for 3 hours, and subsequently the culture medium was replaced with Dulbecco
modified Eagle medium (DMEM) supplemented with
10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). Cell lysate of transfected
cells was prepared, resolved on 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride membrane (Hybond-P, Amersham
Biosciences, Cowley, UK), and probed using anti-SPAG9
antibody, as described earlier.9
Cell Growth and Colony Formation Assays
Cell growth and colony formation assays were done, as
described previously.9 Briefly, SiHa cells, transfected with
SPAG9 small interfering RNA or control small interfering
RNA, were trypsinized, counted, and seeded at a density
of 5  105 cells in 35-mm dish plates. Cell growth was
determined by counting the number of cells at 24 hours,
48 hours, and 72 hours using a hemocytometer. For colony formation assay, SiHa cells were grown and treated
with SPAG9 small interfering RNA or control small interfering RNA and plated at low densities in 35-mm dishes
(4  102 to 103 cells/plate) in triplicates. Cells were
allowed to grow for 9 to 12 days, and the colonies were
fixed with 5% glutaraldehyde in PBS, stained with 5%
crystal violet, and counted manually.
Migration and Invasion Assays
The ability of the SiHa cells transfected with 6 lg of
SPAG9 small interfering RNA or control small interfering
RNA to migrate through a filter or to invade through a biological barrier was determined by transwell insert chambers (Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ) with 8-lm
pore filters. SiHa cells at a density of 2  105 cells/mL
were seeded in the upper chambers with 200 lL serumfree DMEM, and the lower wells were filled with 750 lL
DMEM, with 10% FBS as an inducer for cell migration.
For the invasion assay, a matrix barrier was formed by
coating Matrigel at 5 mg/mL in serum-free DMEM. After
an incubation period of 48 hours at 37 C, the cells that
5690

migrated to the lower surface of the filter were fixed with
5% glutaraldehyde in PBS for 10 minutes, stained with
0.5% toluidine blue (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Mo), and
counted. Each experiment was carried out in triplicate in
3 independent experiments to ensure consistency. The
statistical significance of the results was determined using
Student t test. A P value of <.05 was considered statistically significant.
Monolayer Wound Healing Assay
Wound healing assay was done to determine the changes
in cell motility, as described previously.9 Briefly, SiHa
cells transfected with 6 lg of SPAG9 small interfering
RNA or control small interfering RNA were seeded at a
density of 2  106 in 35-mm dish plates. At 100% confluency, cells were scratched with a 200-lL filter tip to create
an artificial wound and photographed at 0 hours and at a
time interval of 12 hours, 24 hours, and 48 hours. For validation of data, every experiment was done in triplicates
and repeated 4 times.
In Vivo Effects of SPAG9 Small Interfering
RNA on the Growth of Cervical Xenograft
in Nude Mice
For in vivo studies, human tumor xenografts were established in 4-week-old athymic nude mice (Nii:NIH [S]
[nu/nu]). Two groups of 6 mice were injected with
1  107 SiHa cells subcutaneously to generate a primary
tumor. Administration of small interfering RNA plasmid
was initiated when the tumor volume was 50-100 mm3.
Fifty micrograms of plasmids in 200 lL of PBS were
injected into the tail vein of the mice followed by a booster
dose of 25 lg of plasmid, twice a week for 6 weeks.
Tumors were monitored for a total of 42 days. Tumor
volume was calculated by using the formula V ¼ p
6  Dl  Ds2, where V is volume, Dl is the largest diameter, and Ds is the smallest diameter. Mice were sacrificed
after 42 days, and tumors were excised, weighed, and
processed for immunohistochemical analysis of SPAG9
and proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) expression.
Immunohistochemical Analysis
Tumor tissues excised from the control small interfering
RNA and SPAG9 small interfering RNA-injected nude
Cancer

December 15, 2009

SPAG9 Is Involved in Cellular Motility/Garg et al

mice were fixed in formalin. Tissue sections (3-4 lm)
were treated with 1% hydrogen peroxide to block the endogenous peroxidase activity and subsequently blocked
with 5% normal goat serum. Tissue sections were then
incubated with anti-SPAG9 antibody at 4 C overnight,
followed by washing with PBS and incubation with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated goat antirat IgG (Jackson
ImmunoResearch) for 2 hours at room temperature.
Immunoreactivity was observed using chromogen 0.05%
3,30 -diaminobenzidine (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, Mo).
Six random fields of each tissue section were examined by
counting >500 cells under 400 magnification.

that SPAG9 gene expression was independent of histologic cell types of cervical cancer.
SPAG9 Protein Expression in Cervical
Cancer Cell Lines
Earlier, we reported that SPAG9 protein expression was
associated with a significant proportion of patients with
SCC of the cervix.11 Therefore, in the present study, we
investigated the SPAG9 protein expression in various

Statistical Analyses
The significance of the in vitro and in vivo data was determined by Student 2-tailed t test using the SPSS 16.0 statistical software package (SPSS Inc., Chicago, Ill). P < .05
was considered statistically significant. All experimental
data are presented as mean  standard error.

RESULTS
Expression of SPAG9 mRNA in Cervix
Cancer Cell Lines
We previously reported that SPAG9 gene is expressed in
most patients with SCC of the cervix.11 In the present
study, we investigated the expression of the SPAG9 gene
in various cervical cancer cell lines: SiHa (SCC of cervix),
HeLa (adenocarcinoma of cervix), CaSki (epidermoid carcinoma of cervix), and C-33A (carcinoma of cervix). The
total RNA was isolated and cDNA was synthesized from
SiHa, HeLa, CaSki, and C-33A cells. After cDNA synthesis, to avoid any false-positive results attributable to the
amplification of contaminated genomic DNA in the
cDNA preparation, all SPAG9 primers were designed to
amplify exons separated by an intron. SPAG9 mRNA was
detected in all 4 cell lines and testis by reverse transcriptase
(RT) PCR, as illustrated in Figure 1A. The PCR amplicon
in cancer cells was the same as in testis. The PCR products
from these cancer cells were cloned in TOPO vector and
confirmed by nucleotide sequencing. The DNA sequence
analysis of the PCR product showed no mutation. cDNA
quality was checked by using b-actin amplification as an
internal control (Fig. 1A). Hence, these results suggest
Cancer

December 15, 2009

FIGURE 1. SPAG9 expression in human cervix cancer cells is
shown. (A) Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
analysis of SPAG9 mRNA expression yielded 1.25 kb product
from SiHa, HeLa, CaSki, C-33A, and normal testis. b-Actin was
used as an internal control. (B) Immunofluorescence staining
of SPAG9 protein is shown in fixed and permeabilized cervical cancer cells (SiHa [a], HeLa [c], CaSki [e], and C-33A [g])
and in live cervix cancer cells (SiHa [b], HeLa [d], CaSki [f],
and C-33A [h]). Nuclear staining was done by 40 ,6-diamidino2-phenylindole. The fluorescence images were merged using
Image-Pro Plus version 5.1 (MediaCybernetics, Bethesda, Md).
Original magnification, 400; objective, 40.

5691

Original Article

FIGURE 2. Flow cytometric analysis of SPAG9 expression is shown. Percentile fluorescence (displacement of fluorescence on the
x axis) is shown for control SiHa (A), HeLa (C), CaSki (E), and C-33A (G) cells stained with secondary antibody only (M2). Percentile fluorescence of SPAG9-expressing SiHa (B), HeLa (D), CaSki (F), and C-33A cells (H) probed with anti-SPAG9 antibodies
showed fluorescence displacement on the x axis, indicating surface localization of SPAG9 (M1). M1 indicates gating of fluorescence-positive cells; M2, gating of fluorescence-negative cells.

histologic types of cervical cancer cells by indirect immunofluorescence and flow cytometric analysis using antiSPAG9 antibodies. As revealed in representative photomicrograph in Figure 1B, strong SPAG9 immunoreactivity
was observed in cervical cancer cells. The results showed
that in fixed and permeabilized cervical cancer cells, SiHa
(Fig. 1B[a]), HeLa (Fig. 1B[c]), CaSki (Fig. 1B[e]), and
C-33A (Fig. 1B[g]), SPAG9 protein was abundant in the
cytoplasm; however, distinct surface localization was
observed in live cervical cancer cells: SiHa (Fig. 1B[b]),
HeLa (Fig. 1B[d]), CaSki (Fig. 1B[f]), and C-33A (Fig.
1B[h]). Subsequently, these results were confirmed by
flow cytometric analysis (Fig. 2). Side scatter versus forward scatter gate analysis was carried out for all the experiments to avoid debris (data not shown). In the control
cells, no or very low surface distribution 0.59% (Fig. 2A),
0.37% (Fig. 2C), 0.46% (Fig. 2E), and 0.27% (Fig. 2G)
fluorescence intensity was observed, whereas 93%
(Fig. 2B), 94% (Fig. 2D), 95% (Fig. 2F), and 97% (Fig.
2H) fluorescence intensity or displacement of fluores5692

cence on the x axis was observed in SiHa, HeLa, CaSki,
and C-33A cells, respectively, distinctly showing surface
localization of SPAG9 protein. Hence, these results
showed that each of these histologic types of cervix cancer
cells exhibit SPAG9 protein expression, which may participate in cancer growth and early spread, as reported earlier
in cancer patients with SCC of the cervix.11

Reduction of SPAG9 Expression in SiHa
Cells by RNA Interference
A small interfering RNA approach was used to selectively
knock down the expression of SPAG9 in SCC-derived
SiHa cervical cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. We
designed and synthesized the 2 complementary oligonucleotides encoding short hairpin transcripts directed
against a portion of the SPAG9 mRNA (GenBank Accession No. X91879) and cloned as described earlier.16 To
investigate the potential of SPAG9 as a therapeutic target
for cervical carcinoma, our approach was to use SPAG9
Cancer

December 15, 2009

SPAG9 Is Involved in Cellular Motility/Garg et al

FIGURE 3. Silencing of SPAG9 expression by small interfering RNA (siRNA) and its effects on cell growth and colony formation
are shown. (A) Western blot depicts ablation of SPAG9 expression in SiHa cells transfected with SPAG9 siRNA, compared with
SPAG9 siRNA-I and control siRNA. Tubulin was used as a control. (B) A representative histograph shows SPAG9 protein level
expressed as the ratio of SPAG9 to tubulin. Densitometric analysis showed 70% reduction in SPAG9 protein expression in SPAG9
siRNA-transfected cells compared with control siRNA. (C) Knockdown of SPAG9 expression inhibits cellular growth of cervical
cancer cells. SiHa cells transfected with control or SPAG9 siRNA were seeded in 35-mm dish plates, and viable cell numbers were
counted every 24 hours by trypan blue staining. (D) The inhibitory effect of SPAG9 siRNA on colony formation ability in SiHa cells
is shown. Various numbers of SiHa cells transfected with control or SPAG9 siRNA were seeded in 35-mm dish plates, and colony
formation was analyzed by manual counting after 10 days. Columns indicate mean (n ¼ 3); bars, standard error. The difference in
growth rate and colony formation between control siRNA and SPAG9 siRNA-transfected SiHa cells was statistically significant. *P
< .0001. These results are representative of 3 independent experiments performed in triplicate.

small interfering RNA to inhibit SPAG9 expression and
study its effect on cell growth and in cellular behaviors in
cancer cells. As illustrated in Figure 3A, 2 SPAG9-specific
small interfering RNA targets (SPAG9 small interfering
RNA-I and SPAG9 small interfering RNA) reported earlier9 were analyzed. Western blotting analysis revealed
that SPAG9 small interfering RNA significantly resulted
in ablation of SPAG9 protein expression in comparison to
SPAG9 small interfering RNA-I; however, there was some
residual SPAG9 protein expression detected. Furthermore, densitometric analysis revealed 70% reduction in
SPAG9 protein expression in SPAG9 small interfering
RNA-treated cells as compared with SPAG9 small interCancer

December 15, 2009

fering RNA-I and control small interfering RNA-treated
cells (Fig. 3B). Therefore, subsequently all in vitro and in
vivo assays were carried out using SPAG9 small interfering
RNA. SiHa cells were transfected with SPAG9 small interfering RNA, which resulted in a gradual and significant
decrease in cell growth (Fig. 3C). After 72 hours, cell growth
was reduced to 29%. Similarly, the colony formation was
significantly (P < .0001) inhibited by treatment with
SPAG9 small interfering RNA, but not with control small
interfering RNA (Fig. 3D). The number of cell colonies
treated with SPAG9 small interfering RNA was significantly
reduced for various cell numbers seeded for SiHa (range of
28%-32% for 400-1000 cells). These results indicate that
5693

Original Article

FIGURE 4. SPAG9 knockdown inhibits cellular motility and invasion in SiHa cells. (A) Transwell migration assay showed the inhibitory effects of SPAG9 small interfering RNA (siRNA) on SiHa cell migration. After 48 hours of incubation, cells that migrated to
the lower chamber were fixed, stained, and counted using a hemocytometer. A representative histograph shows the number of
migrated cells in control siRNA and SPAG9 siRNA-transfected SiHa cells. (B) The effect of SPAG9 siRNA treatment on cell invasion was determined using the Matrigel invasion assay. Quantitative determination of the number of invaded cells in SPAG9
siRNA-transfected SiHa cells showed reduction in the invading ability. (C) A wound-healing assay for evaluating the inhibitory
effects of SPAG9 siRNA on SiHa cell migration is shown. A confluent monolayer of SiHa cells transfected with SPAG9 siRNA and
control siRNA was scratched, and repair was monitored microscopically at 12 hours, 24 hours, and 48 hours. Representative photomicrographs revealed that closing of the scratch wound in SPAG9 siRNA-transfected cells was not complete even after 48
hours, whereas cells transfected with control siRNA successfully closed the scratch wound within 24 hours. Columns indicate
mean (n ¼ 3); bars, standard error. *P < .0001, statistically significant compared with the control siRNA. These results are representative of 3 independent experiments performed in triplicate.

vector-based RNA interference could effectively suppress
SPAG9 expression that apparently reduces cell growth and
colony-forming ability in cervical cancer cells.
Depletion of SPAG9 Suppresses
Metastatic Properties of Cervical
Cancer Cells In Vitro
Tumor metastasis comprises multiple steps, wherein tumor
cells need to express a variety of properties, including
increased motility and invasive capacity, to complete the
5694

metastatic process. Because the cellular motility is considered an important step in the invasive processes of metastasis, the effect of SPAG9 small interfering RNA on cell
migration was examined. Transwell migration assays were
carried out using 8-lm inserts, which revealed 68% inhibition in the motility potential of SiHa cells transfected with
SPAG9 small interfering RNA (Fig. 4A). The histogram
representation also reveals a significantly lower number of
cells having migrated through inserts (P < .0001).
Subsequently, we evaluated the ability of SiHa cells
transfected with control small interfering RNA or SPAG9
Cancer

December 15, 2009

SPAG9 Is Involved in Cellular Motility/Garg et al

FIGURE 5. In vivo effects of SPAG9 small interfering RNA (siRNA) in a cervical tumor xenograft model. (A) Representative mice
bear tumors (arrows) treated with control siRNA or SPAG9 siRNA. (B) A graph shows tumor volume as calculated on the indicated days. Tumor diameter was measured with a caliper every 3 days, and tumor volume was calculated by the formula V ¼ !/
6  Dl  Ds2, where V is volume, Dl is the largest diameter, and Ds is the smallest diameter. Mean tumor diameters and their 95%
confidence intervals were calculated. Significant reduction in tumor volume was observed in mice injected with SPAG9 siRNA at
24 days (P ¼.03), 36 days (P ¼.005), and 42 days (P < .0001) compared with mice treated with control siRNA. (C) Comparative
tumor size differences were observed between control siRNA and SPAG9 siRNA-treated mice (Day 42). (D) A representative histograph of tumor weight revealed significant reduction in SPAG9 siRNA-treated mice (P < .0001), compared with control siRNAtreated mice, which is consistent with tumor volume data. Columns indicate mean (n ¼ 3); bars, standard error. *P < .05;
**P < .0001, statistically significant.

small interfering RNA to invade through an artificial
extracellular matrix in a Matrigel invasion assay. Similar
to the migration assay, SPAG9 small interfering RNA
inhibited the invasion of SiHa cells by 69% (Fig. 4B). As
shown in Figure 4B, the histogram representation shows
that a significantly lower number of SiHa cells invaded
through a reconstituted basement membrane barrier
(Matrigel), indicating that the invasive potential of SiHa
cells was severely affected in SPAG9 small interfering
RNA-transfected cells (P < .0001).
Furthermore, to investigate the antimetastatic activity
of SPAG9 small interfering RNA, we assessed the effect of
SPAG9 small interfering RNA on the migration of SiHa
cells in the wound healing assay. The migration of SiHa
cells was compared between control small interfering RNA
and SPAG9 small interfering RNA transfected cells after
creating scratch wounds at 12 hours, 24 hours, and
Cancer

December 15, 2009

48 hours. As shown in Figure 4C, the closing of the scratch
wound in SPAG9 small interfering RNA transfected cells
was not complete even after 48 hours, whereas cells transfected with control small interfering RNA successfully
closed the entire wound in 24 hours. These results collectively indicate that the SPAG9 small interfering RNA effectively reduces the migration ability of SiHa cells.

RNA Interference-Mediated Inhibition of
SPAG9 Decreases Human Cervical Tumor
Growth in Nude Mice
Our findings that reduction of SPAG9 expression by
RNAi significantly inhibited colony formation led us to
evaluate its effect on tumor growth in nude mice in vivo.
The dose and route of SPAG9 small interfering RNA
administration was determined from our previous study
5695

Original Article

FIGURE 6. RNA interference effect on proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) and SPAG9 protein expression by immunohistochemical analysis. (A) Control small interferening RNA (siRNA)-treated tumor tissue demonstrated SPAG9 protein expression,
whereas (B) SPAG9 siRNA-administered tumor showed no or very weak SPAG9 protein expression. The histograph corresponds
to the number of cells showing immunoreactivity against SPAG9 in control siRNA and SPAG9 siRNA-treated mice. Similarly, (C)
tumor tissues from control siRNA-treated mice showed significantly higher PCNA expression, whereas SPAG9 siRNA-treated tumor revealed reduced PCNA expression (D). The histograph corresponds to the number of cells showing immunoreactivity
against PCNA in control siRNA and SPAG9-siRNA treated mice. Columns indicate mean; bars, standard error. *P < .0001, statistically significant. Original magnification, 400; objective, 40.

documenting in vivo efficacy of SPAG9 small interfering
RNA against renal cancer cells.9 The effect of SPAG9
small interfering RNA or control small interfering RNA
on SiHa cervical tumor in nude mice was continuously
monitored for 42 days. In Figure 5A, a representative photograph shows reduced tumor growth in SPAG9 small
interfering RNA-treated mice compared with control
small interfering RNA-treated mice. Figure 5B shows the
average tumor volume over the total 42 days of study
between these 2 groups. Mice injected with SPAG9 small
interfering RNA had sustained a significant tumor growth
arrest compared with mice administered control small
interfering RNA, as shown in Figure 5C. On average,
SPAG9 small interfering RNA treatment resulted in
decreased tumor growth by 68% at Day 24 (P ¼ .03),
73% at Day 36 (P ¼ .005), and 78% at Day 42
(P < .0001). Consistent with tumor volume data, the
average wet weight of the tumor was significantly
5696

(P < .0001) reduced in SPAG9 small interfering RNAtreated mice compared with mice administered control
small interfering RNA (Fig. 5D).
Furthermore, to investigate whether the inhibition
of tumor growth is associated with the down-regulation of
SPAG9 expression, the xenograft tumors were dissected
and processed for immunohistochemical staining of
SPAG9 protein expression. As shown in Figure 6, the
SPAG9 protein was down-regulated in SPAG9 small
interfering RNA-administered xenograft (Fig. 6D), compared with high SPAG9 expression in the control small
interfering RNA-administered tumors (Fig. 6C). In addition, to test whether SPAG9 small interfering RNA-mediated inhibition of SiHa cancer growth in vivo was
associated with reduced cell proliferation, tumor tissues
were processed and probed for PCNA expression. As
shown in Figure 6, a significant reduction of PCNA
expression (63%; P < .0001) was observed in tumors
Cancer

December 15, 2009

SPAG9 Is Involved in Cellular Motility/Garg et al

from SPAG9 small interfering RNA-treated mice (Fig.
6B) compared with mice treated with control small interfering RNA (Fig. 6A). These results further strengthen the
significant effect of SPAG9 suppression on SiHa cancer
growth and suggest that SPAG9 may be a molecular target
for cancer treatments.

DISCUSSION
Cervical cancer remains a major gynecologic malignancy, causing a rise in the incidences of cancer death
among women because of metastasis.1 Especially in
developing countries, most cervical cancer cases arise
because of unavailability of screening methods and
proper medical infrastructure, which puts the patients
at higher risk of invasiveness of the disease.2 Invasive
neoplasms arise from transformed cells through clonal
expansion of cells having a selective advantage.17 Eventually genomic instability, both genetic and epigenetic,
enhances the process of cellular proliferation and invasive potential features of cancer cells. Cervical cancer is
a heterogeneous group of neoplasms that includes different histologic subgroups, each with its own underlying molecular genetic events.
Small interfering RNA is a novel approach to
induce gene silencing through induction of RNA interference. This specific method has emerged as 1 of the
most promising strategies for therapeutic product development. Its wider application with high efficiency18
and specificity19,20 could have high impact and clinical
relevance to any disease by manipulating gene expression.21 The present study for the first time reports the
effective use of vector-based small interfering RNAmediated knockdown of SPAG9 expression to address
the possible role of SPAG9 in metastasis. Our findings
suggest that the small interfering RNA-directed transcriptional silencing is a promising tool for suppression
of SPAG9 gene function and illustrate the potential of
its application in cancer treatment.
Recently, we reported the SPAG9 gene, which is
involved in the c-Jun N terminal kinase (JNK) signaling
module22,23 and functions as a scaffolding protein.
SPAG9 specifically binds to JNK24 that plays an important regulatory role in several physiologic processes,
including cell survival, proliferation, apoptosis, and tumor development.25,26 Recent studies have indeed indiCancer

December 15, 2009

cated the role of SPAG9 in the early spread of renal cell
carcinoma9 and breast cancer.10 Furthermore, SPAG9 was
found to be associated with malignancy in various histotypes of epithelial ovarian cancer.8 In addition, we also
reported an association of SPAG9 expression with early
stages of cervical cancer in clinical specimens.11 These
observations prompted us to investigate the role of
SPAG9 expression in the tumorigenesis of cervical cancer.
The metastasis is associated with increased migratory and
invasive properties; therefore, we investigated the role of
SPAG9 expression in cellular motility and invasiveness in
SiHa cells derived from SCC of the cervix. The important
finding of this study is that SPAG9 expression in cervical
cancer is associated with cellular growth, cell migration,
and invasion.
To date, the expression of several cancer testis antigen genes such as MAGE, GAGE-3/6, LAGE, and PRAME
has been reported in the HeLa cervical cancer-derived cell
line.25 In contrast, no expression of BAGE, GAGE-1/2,
and NY-ESO-1 genes was observed in HeLa cells. Expression of CAGE-1 and CRT2 has also been reported in cervical cancer cell lines.26 However, association of cancer
testis antigens with the malignant properties of SCC of
the cervix has not been established so far. Because SCC of
the cervix is a leading cause of death in women worldwide,1 in this current study we used SiHa cells derived
from SCC of the cervix to investigate the functional role
of SPAG9 in tumorigenesis of cervical cancer. SPAG9
gene expression was detected in different histotypes of cervical cancer cell lines by RT-PCR. Furthermore, sequence
analysis of the RT-PCR products from different cervical
cell lines revealed a homologous nucleotide sequence as
SPAG9 cDNA and did not show any mutation within
SPAG9 cDNA. To assess whether SPAG9 plays a critical
role in the malignancy of cervical cancer cells, we knocked
down the expression of endogenous SPAG9 in SiHa cells.
SPAG9 small interfering RNA successfully suppressed
SPAG9 expression in cervical cancer cells, leading to a
suppression of cellular growth, migration, and invasion of
SiHa cervical cells in vitro. Our findings revealed that
knockdown of SPAG9 expression by small interfering
RNA significantly suppressed cellular motility and tumor
growth of cervical SCC in vivo. In this regard, a recent
study also revealed that knockdown of SMYD3 expression
by small interfering RNA significantly reduced cell proliferation, migration, and invasion of HeLa cells.27 We
5697

Original Article

further confirmed that SPAG9 small interfering RNA
suppressed tumor growth in a xenograft cervical tumor
model in immune-compromised mice. Our study demonstrated that small interfering RNA directed against
SPAG9 successfully inhibited the metastatic potential of
SiHa cervix cells.
In summary, the present study provides evidence
indicating a critical and specific role of SPAG9 in malignant properties of cervical carcinoma. Furthermore, our
data demonstrate that plasmid-mediated RNA interference of SPAG9 successfully inhibited the expression of
SPAG9 in in vitro and in vivo models of cervical cancer,
leading to several antitumor activities such as inhibitory
effects on cell proliferation, migration, invasion, and tumor growth. We successfully established that the suppression of SPAG9 expression can effectively decrease the
cellular motility and tumor growth of cervical SCC in
vivo. These findings suggest that the RNA interference
approach can be an effective therapeutic strategy for cervical cancer and therefore warrant future investigations in
human clinical trials. The results support the potential
role of SPAG9 in tumorigenesis of cervical cancer cells,
which confirmed the association of SPAG9 expression in
cervical cancer patients.11

7.

Simpson AJG, Caballero OL, Jungbluth A, Chen YT, Old
LJ. Cancer/testis antigens, gametogenesis and cancer. Nat
Rev Cancer. 2005;5:615-625.

8.

Garg M, Chaurasiya D, Rana R, et al. Sperm-associated
antigen 9, a novel cancer testis antigen, is a potential target
for immunotherapy in epithelial ovarian cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2007;13:1421-1428.

9.

Garg M, Kanojia D, Khosla A, et al. Sperm-associated antigen 9 is associated with tumor growth, migration, and invasion in renal cell carcinoma. Cancer Res. 2008;68:82408248.

Conflict of Interest Disclosures

15. Helm J, Enkemann SA, Coppola D, et al. Dedifferentiation
precedes invasion in the progression from Barrett’s metaplasia to esophageal adenocarcinoma. Clin Cancer Res. 2005;
11:2478-2485.

Supported by the Cancer Research Program, Associated Cancer
Center for Immunotherapy, Department of Biotechnology,
Government of India.

References

10. Kanojia D, Garg M, Gupta S, Gupta A, Suri A. Spermassociated antigen 9, a novel biomarker for early detection
of breast cancer. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2009;
18:630-639.
11. Garg M, Kanojia D, Salhan S, et al. Sperm-associated antigen 9 is a biomarker for early cervical carcinoma. Cancer.
2009;115:2671-2683.
12. Kitahara O, Katagiri T, Tsunoda T, et al. Classification of
sensitivity or resistance of cervical cancers to ionizing
radiation according to expression profiles of 62 genes
selected by cDNA microarray analysis. Neoplasia. 2002;
4:295-303.
13. Willis S, Hutchins AM, Hammet F, et al. Detailed gene
copy number and RNA expression analysis of the 17q12-23
region in primary breast cancers. Genes Chromosomes
Cancer. 2003;36:382-392.
14. Linn SC, West RB, Pollack JR, et al. Gene expression
patterns and gene copy number changes in dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans. Am J Pathol. 2003;163:23832395.

16. Rana R, Jagadish N, Garg M, et al. Small interference
RNA-mediated knockdown of sperm associated antigen 9
having structural homology with c-Jun N-terminal kinaseinteracting protein. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006;
340:158-164.

1.

Waggoner SE. Cervical cancer. Lancet. 2003;361:22172225.

2.

Janicek MF, Averette HE. Cervical cancer: successes and
failures. CA Cancer J Clin. 2001;51:92-114.

17. Gao CF, Xie Q, Su YL, et al. Proliferation and invasion:
plasticity in tumor cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005;
102:10528-10533.

3.

Lammers T, Peschke P, Ehemann V, et al. Role of PP2Ca
in cell growth, in radio- and chemosensitivity, and in
tumorigenicity. Mol Cancer. 2007;6:65.

18. Brummelkamp TR, Bernards R, Agami R. Stable suppression of tumorigenicity by virus-mediated RNA interference.
Cancer Cell. 2002;2:243-247.

4.

Yamaguchi H, Wyckoff J, Condeelis J. Cell migration in
tumors. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2005;17:559-564.

5.

Suri A. Cancer testis antigens—their importance in immunotherapy and in the early detection of cancer. Expert Opin
Biol Ther. 2006;6:379-389.

19. Xia H, Mao Q, Eliason SL, et al. RNAi suppresses polyglutamine-induced neurodegeneration in a model of spinocerebellar ataxia. Nat Med. 2004;10:816-820.

6.

Scanlan MJ, Simpson AJ, Old LJ. The cancer/testis genes:
review, standardization, and commentary. Cancer Immun.
2004;4:1.

5698

20. Medarova Z, Pham W, Farrar C, Petkova V, Moore A. In
vivo imaging of siRNA delivery and silencing in tumors.
Nat Med. 2007;13:372-377.
21. Duxbury MS, Whang EE. RNA interference: a practical
approach. J Surg Res. 2004;117:339-344.

Cancer

December 15, 2009

SPAG9 Is Involved in Cellular Motility/Garg et al

22. Shankar S, Mohapatra B, Suri A. Cloning of a novel
human testis mRNA specifically expressed in testicular haploid germ cells, having unique palindromic sequences and
encoding a leucine zipper dimerization motif. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998;243:561-565.
23. Jagadish N, Rana R, Selvi R, et al. Characterization of a
novel human sperm-associated antigen 9 (SPAG9) having
structural homology with c-Jun N-terminal kinase-interacting protein. Biochem J. 2005;389:73-82.
24. Qi M, Elion EA. MAP kinase pathways. J Cell Sci. 2005;
118:3569-3572.

Cancer

December 15, 2009

25. Sarcevic B, Spagnoli GC, Terracciano L, et al. Expression of
cancer/testis tumor associated antigens in cervical squamous
cell carcinoma. Oncology. 2003;64:443-449.
26. Park S, Lim Y, Lee D, et al. Identification and characterization of a novel cancer/testis antigen gene CAGE-1. Biochim
Biophys Acta. 2003;1625:173-182.
27. Wang SZ, Luo XG, Shen J, Zou JN, Lu YH, Xi T. Knockdown of SMYD3 by RNA interference inhibits cervical carcinoma cell growth and invasion in vitro. BMB Rep.
2008;41:294-299.

5699

