www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 5), pp: 7647-7665
Research Paper

Predicting the impact of combined therapies on myeloma cell
growth using a hybrid multi-scale agent-based model

Zhiwei Ji1, Jing Su1, Dan Wu1, Huiming Peng1, Weiling Zhao1, Brian Nlong Zhao1,
Xiaobo Zhou1
1

Division of Radiologic Sciences and Center for Bioinformatics and Systems Biology, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Medical
Center Boulevard, Winston-Salem, NC, USA 27157

Correspondence to: Xiaobo Zhou, email: xizhou@wakehealth.edu
Keywords: agent-based model, ODE, modeling, multiple myeloma, immune
Received: April 15, 2016     Accepted: November 30, 2016     Published: December 09, 2016

ABSTRACT
Multiple myeloma is a malignant still incurable plasma cell disorder. This is
due to refractory disease relapse, immune impairment, and development of multidrug resistance. The growth of malignant plasma cells is dependent on the bone
marrow (BM) microenvironment and evasion of the host’s anti-tumor immune
response. Hence, we hypothesized that targeting tumor-stromal cell interaction and
endogenous immune system in BM will potentially improve the response of multiple
myeloma (MM). Therefore, we proposed a computational simulation of the myeloma
development in the complicated microenvironment which includes immune cell
components and bone marrow stromal cells and predicted the effects of combined
treatment with multi-drugs on myeloma cell growth. We constructed a hybrid multiscale agent-based model (HABM) that combines an ODE system and Agent-based
model (ABM). The ODEs was used for modeling the dynamic changes of intracellular
signal transductions and ABM for modeling the cell-cell interactions between stromal
cells, tumor, and immune components in the BM. This model simulated myeloma
growth in the bone marrow microenvironment and revealed the important role of
immune system in this process. The predicted outcomes were consistent with the
experimental observations from previous studies. Moreover, we applied this model
to predict the treatment effects of three key therapeutic drugs used for MM, and
found that the combination of these three drugs potentially suppress the growth of
myeloma cells and reactivate the immune response. In summary, the proposed model
may serve as a novel computational platform for simulating the formation of MM and
evaluating the treatment response of MM to multiple drugs.

INTRODUCTION

stromal cells (BMSCs) via some key factors (SDF-1,
TGFβ, IFNγ, IL6, and TNFα, etc.), induces pleiotropic
anti-apoptotic mechanisms, thereby rendering multiple
myeloma cells resistant to established therapeutic
regimens [4, 5].
Recent studies have shown that a small population
of CD138-negative B cells with “side population”
characteristics presents in multiple myeloma [6, 7]. This
cell population has the ability to give rise to clonogenic
growth in vitro and possess stem cell characteristics. These
myeloma initiating (stem) cells (MICs) have shown higher
resistance to chemotherapeutic agents [8]. Our previous
studies demonstrated that 1) BMSCs stimulated the growth
and expansion of MICs [9]; and 2) the enhanced colony-

Multiple myeloma (MM), a B-cell neoplasm, is
characterized by clonal expansion of plasma cells in the
hematopoietic bone marrow (BM) and over-production of
circulating monoclonal immunoglobulin [1, 2]. MM has
long been used as a paradigmatic model for investigating
the role of the microenvironment in blood cancers [3].
Bone marrow, the natural niche of multiple myeloma,
provides a milieu of growth factors and cytokines
for multiple myeloma cell survival and proliferation.
Therefore, the bone marrow microenvironment greatly
contributes to the resistance of myeloma against various
therapies. Interaction of myeloma cells with bone marrow
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7647

Oncotarget

forming and self-renewal ability of MICs were regulated
via the centralized role of SDF-1 (stromal cell-derived
factor 1) [9, 10]. We also established an agent-based
model using the Markov Chain Monte Carlo approach to
simulate the effects of SDF-1-induced chemo-physical
communications among MICs and BMSCs on myeloma
cell growth and examine if the biophysical properties of
myeloma niches are druggable with two representative
drugs: AMD3100, and Bortezomib (BTZ) [11]. However,
the resistance of myeloma to those drugs was not only
attributed to the myeloma-BMSC interactions.
The immune system has been known to modulate
tumor cell growth, and tumor development can promote
immunosuppression. Conversely, immunosuppression
may support tumor development [12, 13]. Multiple
myeloma-induced immune paresis is mainly attributed
to the impairment of T-cell (CD4+, and CD8+) activation
and proliferation, which is mediated by myeloma cellinduced production of transforming growth factor (TGFβ)
[3, 12, 14]. Currently, immunomodulatory drugs, such
as Lenalidomide (LEN) and Thalidomide (Thal), have
been used to overcome conventional drug resistance
and improve patient outcomes in MM [14]. Importantly,
IMiDs-induced stimulatory effects on effector T cell and
inhibitory role on T regulatory cells (Tregs) have been
demonstrated in vivo [15, 16]. However, the precise
cellular targets and the exact molecular mechanism of
actions of IMiDs in multiple myeloma remain unclear.
In clinic, the combined therapy with BTZ and LEN for
the treatment of MM is widely used and is favorable
for the initial therapy, but the majority of patients (50–
60%) continue to suffer relapses [17]. An insight into the
interactions of myeloma cells with BMSCs and immune
cells in bone marrow microenvironment will potentially
improve our understanding of myeloma growth, immune
tolerance, and drug resistance.
Mathematical models have been used to simulate
tumor growth or immune response in human [18, 19].
Everett, et al. proposed an approximation mathematical
model of tumor growth and tumor-induced angiogenesis
in ovarian cancer [20]. Eikenberry, et al. developed
Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) to describe the basic
process of melanoma invasion into healthy tissues [19].
However, systemic modeling of tumor growth (lineage
process of cancer stem cell) and immune response within
an integrated system was rarely studied. In this study,
we proposed a 3D hybrid multi-scale agent-based model
(HABM) to reveal the molecular mechanisms associated
with myeloma development and immune escape in the
bone marrow microenvironment (Figure 1). Hybrid model
was composed of an ABM model and ODE system [43].
In our HABM, the ODEs were designed to simulate
the dynamics of intracellular signal transductions and
ABM to describe the cell-cell communications between
stromal cells, tumor, and immune components in the
Bone Marrow.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

In the proposed model, we simulated the dynamics
of MIC-derived myeloma development in a BM
microenvironment to study the role of tumor-stroma
interactions in MM progression and immune evasion.
The BM microenvironment consisted of BMSCs and
immune cells. This modeling system was classified into
intracellular, intercellular, and tissue levels. The HABM
model integrates events at different spatial and temporal
scales. For the spatial scales, intracellular signaling
pathways of BMSCs and MICs were simulated by ODEs
to determine the biomechanical phenotype of BMSCs (cell
stiffness) and tumor cell behaviors (such as migration
and apoptosis). Cancer cells discern the changes of local
stiffness of BSMCs and compete for the best location
in the extracellular matrix (ECM) for their migration
or proliferation. For the temporal scales, we modeled
the intracellular signaling dynamics (minutes to hours);
cell division, apoptosis, and local migration (hours to
days); drug response (days to weeks); and tumor growth
(weeks to months). In order to model the tumor growth
and immune response of myeloma cells quantitatively
within the same system, we mainly focused on the direct
and indirect role of two important factors: SDF-1 and
TGFβ. The studies from our groups and others have found
that SDF-1α enhances the rigidity of BMSCs through
its receptor CXCR4, and provides a proper environment
for myeloma cell proliferation and migration [10, 11].
Immune tolerance of myeloma cells was mainly mediated
by the production of TGFβ [21]. Our in vitro experiments
also shown that SDF-1 and TGFβ play key roles in
promoting the tumor growth, survival and propagation.
SDF-1 triggers CXCR4 receptor dimerization and
activate the intracellular signaling pathways of BMSCs,
and the positive feedbacks from BMSC will change the
behaviors of MICs. Secretion of TGFβ both from BMSCs
and myeloma cells inhibited the proliferation of CD8+ T
cells and promoted the expansion of Tregs. Moreover,
activated Tregs suppressed the function of CD8+ T cells
via induction of cell cycle arrest or apoptosis. Through
the parameters tuning, the outcomes from our HABM
model under different conditions were consistent with
the experimental observations from previous studies.
Moreover, to examine the potential targets of multiple
myeloma in this microenvironment and discover novel
therapeutic strategy, we further simulated the treatment
effects of three representative drugs (BTZ, LEN and Thal).
Our findings suggest that targeting SDF-1 and TGFβ in
BM using a triple-combination with BTZ, LEN, and
Thal, potentially improve the response of myeloma cells
by increasing the inhibition of myeloma cell growth and
activating the endogenous immune surveillance against
tumor antigens.
In summary, the proposed HABM model provides
new insight into the myeloma development in the bone
marrow microenvironment carrying immune system;
and also builds an efficient computational platform for
7648

Oncotarget

prediction of drug response for discovering the optimal
dose combination.

stiffness, which in turn regulated the proliferation of MIC
(Figure 2A).
To understand the effects of stiffness on myeloma
cells, RPPA data were also collected in the myeloma
cells treated with different stiffness (100Pa, and 400Pa)
at 0, 30 min, 60 min, and 24 hour. The expression of an
individual protein after treatment was normalized using
the value obtained at t = 0. The samples were collected
at 30–60 min and 24 hour represented the immediate
and stable responses of MICs to different stiffness
cues, respectively. Total 195 proteins were analyzed, in
which 45 proteins up-regulated and 19 proteins downregulated significantly. Several proteins were significantly
upregulated under the condition of 400Pa, such as HSP70,
BCL2, etc (Supplementary Table S1). Based on the
measured proteins in the RPPA dataset and data collected
from related literatures, we built an intracellular signaling
pathway map for MIC (Supplementary Figure S2). Several
important signaling pathways were included in this map.
The stiffness of BMSC trigged the expression of FAK in
MIC, which can increase cell adhesion via p38 and JNK
signaling pathways, and promote cell survival via PI3K/
AKT signaling. Moreover, autocrine SDF-1 signaling can
also stimulate the expression of BCL2 and thereby inhibit
the apoptosis of MIC by reducing BAX. In this study, we
investigated the growth and adhesion of myeloma cells
on hydrogel and collagen gels in vitro (see “Materials and
Methods”). Based on the above data and signaling pathway
map shown in the Supplementary Figure S2, we developed
a signaling network module (integrin/FAK pathways) for
dynamically simulating the effect of stiffness on adhesion
and survival of MIC cells (Figure 2B).

RESULTS
RPPA data analysis
In our previous studies, we have demonstrated that
SDF-1α secreted by myeloma cells regulated the rigidity of
BMSCs through binding to its receptor CXCR4, thereby,
provided a proper environment for cell attachment, growth
and migration [10]. Therefore, SDF-1α/CXCR4 axis
appears to play an important role in myeloma cells-BMSC
communication. Hence, we collected RPPA data to study
the SDF-1-mediated signaling pathways. The myeloma
BMSCs were treated with 100 ng/mL SDF-1α and then
protein samples were collected at 0, 5, 10, and 15 min.
The protein profiling was analyzed using Rreverse Phase
Protein Array (RPPA) technology. There are 172 proteins
in this RPPA dataset and the differentially expressed
proteins were presented in the Supplementary Figure S1.
However, stiffness-related signaling pathway was not well
covered by our RPPA data. Choi, et al. proposed a model
of biophysical regulation of BMSC. Binding of SDF-1
ligand to its cognate receptors CXCR4/CXCR7 results in
the activation of PI3K or MEK. Subsequently, MYL2 is
phosphorylated, which leads to changes in cell stiffness
[10]. Hence, we did Western Blot for three key proteins
(FAK, RhoA, and MYL2) as the complementary data
[10, 22]. Focusing on the above measured proteins, we
picked up a sub-graph from Choi’s proposed network for
simulating the dynamic changes of SDF-1-trigged BMSC

Figure 1: Hybrid multi-scale agent-based model of myeloma cell growth.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7649

Oncotarget

Increased expression of SDF-1 in the myelomaassociated bone marrow stromal cells

of TGFß1 contributes to immune suppression in the
MM microenvironment [3]. Here, we measured the
expression of TGFß1 in the myeloma cells treated with or
without BMSCs. Since both BMSCs and myeloma cells
synthesize TGFβ [14, 23, 24], the expression of TGFß1
was determined in BMSCs and myeloma cells separately.
There were dramatic changes of TGFß1 expression in
U266 myeloma cells after cocultured with either healthy
BMSC or myeloma BMSCs as shown in the Figure 4.
A reduced expression of TGFß1 was observed in the
U266 cells cocultured with healthy BMSCs (Figure 4A).
In contrast, the expression of TGFß1 in the U266 cells
cocultured with myeloma BMSCs was enhanced 1.4 fold.
No significant changes in the TGFß1 expression were
seen in the healthy BMSCs cultured with or without U266
cells (Figure 4B). In the myeloma BMSCs cocultured
with U266 cells, the expression of TGFß1 increased about
2.4 times. Additionally, the basal expression level of
TGFß1 in the myeloma BMSCs was about 1.7 times
higher than that in the health BMSCs. Our results indicate
that the interaction of myeloma with BMSC enhances
TGFß1 expression in both cells.

In our previous studies, we found that SDF-1
regulated the stiffness of BMSCs in vitro to generate a
better microenvironment for myeloma growth [22]. We
compared the expression of SDF-1 in BMSCs collected
from myeloma patients (myeloma BMSCs) and healthy
volunteers (healthy BMSCs) with/without coculture of
myeloma cells. As shown in Figure 3A, the SDF-1α mRNA
level in the myeloma BMSCs was 6 times higher than that
in the health BMSCs. The mRNA levels of SDF-1 were
dramatically increased 4.13 ± 0.7 and 2.68 ± 0.2 times in
both myeloma BMSCs and health BMSCs, respectively,
when cocultured with U266 myeloma cells. We also
compared the expression of SDF-1 in U266 myeloma cells.
The expression of SDF-1 was significantly elevated about
16.2 ± 0.4 times and 13.1 ± 0.3 times when cocultured
with myeloma BMSCs and healthy BMSCs, respectively
(Figure 3B). Together, these results suggest that cell-cell
interaction of myeloma cells and BMSCs enhance the
expression of SDF-1 in both types of cells.

Myeloma-BMSC interaction up-regulates TGFβ
expression

Model development
In this study, we established a hybrid multi-scale
agent-based model (HABM) to simulate the development
of myeloma in various bone marrow microenvironments in

TGFß1 is a vital factor in regulating the balance
of Tregs and CD8+ T cells; and increased expression

Figure 2: ODE systems in the proposed model. (A) The intracellular signaling pathways in MIC cell, which modulates adhesion and
survival rate to response the local BMSC stiffness; (B) The intracellular signaling pathways in BMSC cell, which determine the stiffness of
BMSC section according to relative SDF-1 concentration.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7650

Oncotarget

a three-dimensional space, and validated the performance
of this model with experimental data. We hypothesize
that 1) SDF-1 boosts MIC growth and protects MICs
from chemotherapy-induced injury; and further drives
the lineage process of multiple myeloma [11]; 2)
myeloma-BMSC interaction induced secretion of TGFβ,
which suppress the immune response during myeloma
development. As shown in the Figure 1, myeloma
development was simulated at intracellular, intercellular,
and tissue levels. The HABM model described a
simulated system including five types of cells, which were
represented by five types of compartments of intracellular
signaling events and interfaces. Supplementary Table S4
represents the parameters of ABM model, which were
directly collected from some related studies or indirectly
inferred based on the data produced in our laboratory. The
above five compartments are shown below.
(1) Bone Marrow Stromal Cell (BMSC) compartment.
This compartment modeled the 3D reticular network formed
by BMSCs. The changed stiffness of BMSCs in response to
SDF-1 altered the three-dimensional distribution of bone

marrow. Based on the signaling pathways shown in the
Figure 2A, we developed an ODE system to simulate SDF1triggered signaling transduction and BMSC responses. The
details of this ODE system were described in the section
“Materials and Methods”. All the parameters involved in
this system were estimated using GA algorithm [25], and
presented in the Supplementary Table S2. The predicted
stiffness of myeloma BMSC via this ODE system was
changed from 400 to 526pa following treatment with 5nM
SDF-1, which was very close to the experimental results
(400–530 pa) shown in the Choi’s work [10]. To understand
the relationship between ODE system outputs and variations
in individual model parameter values, local parameter
sensitivity analysis was performed [25]. The sensitivity
analysis for these parameters indicated that this system was
very stable (Figure 5).
(2) Myeloma Initiating Cell (MIC) compartment.
This compartment represented the myeloma stem cells.
MIC cells sensed the changes of stiffness from its local
BMSCs and accordingly modulated their proliferation,
differentiation, apoptosis, migration and adhesion. MICs

Figure 3: CXCL2 (SDF-1) expression in U266 and BMSCs. (A) The expression level of CXCL12 in myeloma BMSCs was
increased after coculture with U266 cells. N BMSC means healthy BMSCs, N BMSC+U266 means healthy BMSCs coculture with U266,
M BMSC means myeloma patients’ BMSCs, M BMSC+U266 means M BMSC coculture with U266. (B)The expression of CXCL12 in
U266 cells after coculture with healthy and myeloma BMSCs. U266 means U266 cells only, U266+N BMSC means U266 was collected
after culturing with healthy BMSCs, U266+M BMSC means U266 was collected after culturing myeloma BMSCs. **p < 0.01.

Figure 4: TGFβ expression in U266 and BMSCs. (A)The expression of TGFβ in U266 cells after coculture with healthy and

myeloma BMSCs. U266 means U266 cells only, U266+N BMSC means U266 was collected after culturing with healthy BMSCs, U266+M
BMSC means U266 was collected after culturing myeloma BMSCs. (B) The expression level of TGFβ in myeloma BMSCs was increased
after coculture with U266 cells. N BMSC means healthy BMSCs, N BMSC+ U266 means healthy BMSCs coculture with U266, M BMSC
means myeloma patients’ BMSCs, M BMSC+U266 means M BMSC coculture with U266. **p < 0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7651

Oncotarget

can continuously generate MMs during the process
of proliferation and differentiation [49]. Particularly,
the adhesion and survival rate of MICs were simulated
using an ODE system basing on the signaling pathways
shown in the Figure 2B. The pathway map involved in
this ODE system was determined according to the data
shown in the Supplementary Figure S2 and others from
the related literatures. All of the parameters in this system
were also estimated using GA algorithm [25] and shown
in the Supplementary Table S3. The sensitivity analysis of
all the parameters demonstrated that this system was also
stable (Figure 6).
The predicted outcomes of the ODE system for the
intracellular signaling in MICs had a close similarity to

the experimental data (Supplementary Figures S3–S4). The
measured (Supplementary Figure S3A/S3B) and predicted
(Supplementary Figure S3C/S3D) survival rates of MIC
population with absence/ presence of BTZ under different
collagen Gels (or hydrogels) were consistent. According to
the analysis from Feng et al., the effect of collagen can be
roughly equivalent to hydrogel: the stiffness on collagen
0.5 mg/ml and 0.75mg/ml are close to 200pa and 400pa,
respectively [26]. Another aspect, the adhesion rate of
MICs in the presence of BMSCs from myeloma patients
is 67% (Supplementary Figure S4A), when compared the
cells cultured with normal BMSCs, in which stiffness made
great contribution on cell adhesion as 47% (Supplementary
Figure S4B). Here, we assumed that other factors except

Figure 5: Sensitivity analysis of stiffness-related signaling pathways in BMSC cells.

Figure 6: Sensitivity analysis of survival- and adhesion- associated signaling pathways in MIC cells. (A) Survival rate (B)
Adhesion rate.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7652

Oncotarget

stiffness totally have the same contribution (~20%) to
different conditions. Therefore, the predicted adhesion
rates of MICs from 100 pa to 400 pa were also close to the
observations (Supplementary Figure S4C).
(3) Mature Myeloma cell (MM) compartment.
This compartment represented the mature myeloma cell
population which was differentiated from MICs.
(4) CD8+ (CD8+ CTL) T cell compartment. This
compartment represented the Cytotoxic T Lymphocyte
(CTL) population, which mediates lysis of myeloma cells
through cell-cell contact. The activation and proliferation
of CD8+ T cells reflected the immune response against the
myeloma development.
(5) Regulatory T cell (Treg) compartment. This
compartment represented the immune-suppressive T cell
population, which is responsible for the maintenance
of peripheral tolerance, and has been implicated in the
suppression of tumor immunity. Tregs have been shown
to inhibit tumor-specific T cell functions, such as the
cytotoxic effects of CD8+ T cells.
The intercellular communications in HABM
reflects the relationship between cancer cells, immune
cells and tumor microenvironment evolution during
multiple myeloma progression through the following
five aspects. 1). The MIC-BMSC positive feedback
loop is composed of SDF-1-triggered alteration in the
biomechanical property of BMSC and BMSC-boosted
proliferation of MICs [11]. MICs secreted SDF-1 into
their surrounding extracellular matrix [28]. SDF-1 is then
diffused in the 3D ECM. Responding to the stimulation
from the local SDF-1, the stiffness of BMSCs is altered
via activated SDF-1/CXCR4 signaling pathway [10].
MICs sensed those changes and attached on the stiffer
BMSCs in the local position [26]. Once attached, the
growth factors secreted by BMSCs boost the survival,
proliferation, and differentiation of MICs, and thus drive
multiple myeloma growth. The BMSCs also protected
MICs from the treatment of drugs, such as BTZ [29]. 2).
The lineage process of myeloma expansion is illustrated
by the dynamics of two types of myeloma proliferation.
Myeloma cells (MM) are generated not only from MIC
differentiation but also expansion by themselves [11].
3). CD8+ T cells recognized MICs and MMs in their
local regions, and migrate toward these target cells for
clearance [3]. 4). Accumulation of Treg cells potentially
inhibit the generation of CD8+ T cells, resulting the
suppression of CTL-mediated antitumor immune responses
[27]. 5). The secretion of TGFβ from both myeloma
and BMSCs lead to an increased proliferation of Tregs
and inhibited proliferation of CD8+ T cells, resulting a
suppression of immune response [14]. The myelomaBMSC interaction impair the CTL-mediated lysis of
multiple myeloma cells via the increased production of
TGFβ [30].
The tissue scale of our HABM model reflects the
3D cancer growth via various intercellular cell-cell
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

interactions spatially and temporally. These interactions
include SDF-1-induced MIC-BMSC positive feedback
loops, the myeloma lineage process from MIC to MM,
TGFβ-induced immune suppression, and CTL-mediated
target cell lysis etc. At the tissue level, intracellular
signaling pathways are triggered by the local SDF-1 or
TGFβ via the interfaces of cell agents, and the changes
in the cells’ fate and behaviors in turn modulate the
environment for cell growth. In this scale, the dynamic
3D distribution of SDF-1 is defined by the secretion
of SDF-1 from MICs and the diffusion of SDF-1 in
the 3D ECM. TGFβ can be secreted from both BMSC
and MM, and the dynamic 3D distribution of TGFβ is
defined by the diffusion of TGFβ in the ECM. TGFβ
plays an important role in regulating the immune system.
Chemical microenvironment is determined by the drug
concentration in the bone marrow. In addition, the tissue
stiffness defined by BMSC contraction determined the
biophysical microenvironment. The cell behaviors, such
as proliferation and migration in 3D ECM, determined the
distribution of cell populations in bone marrow.
Multiple myeloma cells at different stages of
differentiation were initially in the bone marrow
microenvironment. We used 100, 100, 20 and 5 cells
of MIC, MM, CD8+ T cells, and Tregs, respectively,
to mimic the initial stage for myeloma spreading to a
new location in the bone marrow. The ratio of Treg/
CD8+ was determined based on the previous findings
[31]. In addition, BTZ, LEN, and Thal were used as the
representatives of cytotoxic and immunomodulatory
drugs in this model to test the response of myeloma
cells and immune cells. These drugs were applied alone
or combined with various doses. The treatment duration
was scheduled with 144 hours (6 days) in HABM, which
represented the acute drug effects in clinic. In HABM
model, a set of parameters for the dosage regimen of three
drugs indicates a treatment condition. Once the variables
related to drug dosages were assigned with certain values,
the cells response to the “treatment” by changing their
apoptosis and proliferation rates. The number of each cell
population in HABM was counted every 2 hours. The drug
effects were quantitatively identified from the changes in
living tumor cell and immune cell populations following
treatment. In this model, we simulated the tumor and
immune responses up to 600 hours.
Moreover, we defined synergy effect index of
three-drug combination, and quantitatively examined
the synergism among these three drugs. Eleven doses of
each drug and their combination with other drugs were
then examined in the established HABM model; and
each treatment condition simulated for 200 times. Time
resolution was 2 hours. Totally 1331 conditions were
simulated for 266,200 times using the parallel computation
on TACC (http://www.tacc.utexas.edu) with 1400 cores.
This is the first time to apply mathematic model for
simulating tumor growth and immune response within
7653

Oncotarget

an integral system. Supplementary Figure S5 shows
simulation examples for myeloma growth in the bone
marrow microenvironment and the effects of immune
system on myeloma cell growth. Supplementary Figure
S5Ai–S5Aiii represent the dynamic changes of myeloma
cell growth in the absence of immune system in the
bone marrow microenvironment. Supplementary Figure
S5Ai indicates that the growing rate of MM is obvious
faster than MIC, consistent with the experimental results
reported by Yang. et al. [32]. The simulation results
for myeloma cell growth at 100 hour and 600  hour
were shown in the Supplementary Figure S5Aii–Aiii,
respectively. When the immune cells were added in
this system, the simulated growth for MICs and MMs
obviously slowed down (Supplementary Figure S5Bi).
Supplementary Figure S5Bii–Biii show that myeloma
cell growth at 100 and 600 hour in the presence of the
immune cells. The results from the Supplementary
Figure S5 indicate a negative regulatory role of the
immune system to myeloma cell growth. Supplementary
Figure S5Bii–Biii represent multiple myeloma cell
killing by CD8+ CTL, however, the anti-MM effects was
interfered by MM-induced immune paresis. The model
shown in Supplementary Figure S5B was further perturbed
with two types of combination treatment strategies,
and the dynamic changes of each cell compartment are
presented in the following sections.

was close to our experimental result shown in the
Supplementary Figure S3. The number of myeloma cells
was reduced 49.5% following two days treatment, which
was also consistent with Campanella’s work [2]. We
further analyzed the effects of LEN on the proliferation
of CD8+ T cells (Figure 7C). The treatment with 5 μM
and 10 μM of LEN led to 38.4% and 46.4% increase in
the number of CD8+ T cells, respectively. These results
were also consistent with the data reported previously
[33]. Moreover, we predicted the suppressive effects of
Tregs on CD8+ T cells proliferation when combined with
different ratio of Treg to CD8+ T cells. As shown in the
Figure 7D, the simulated results were similar to those
from Fostier’s work [34]. Finally, we predicted the CD8+
T cells-mediated lysis of myeloma cells (Figure 7E). The
survival rate of myeloma cells (MIC and MM together) in
presence with three different ratios of CD8+ T cells were
close to the experimental results from Haart. et al [3].
These above simulation results suggest that our HABM
model is of high accuracy.

Effects of therapeutic drugs on myeloma
development
To explore the resistance of myeloma cells to chemoand immuno- therapeutic drugs and the risk of tumor
relapse in a simulated bone marrow microenvironment, we
modeled the outcomes from the treatments with BTZ, LEN,
and Thal, respectively. Multiple myeloma was sensitive to
BTZ, so that anti-cancer therapy using BTZ induces direct
tumor cell apoptosis by activating Caspase-8/9 mediated
apoptotic pathways [14, 35]. According to Campanella’s
experimental results, the dose 1.5 nM of BTZ was a turning
point to the myeloma cell killing [2]. Therefore, we used
1.5 nM BTZ in our model for this simulation. Different from
BTZ, the most important working mechanisms of IMiDs
(such as, LEN and Thal) include T-cell co-stimulatory,
suppression of Tregs, and disruption of myeloma cell
-BMSC interaction [14]; Thus, a relative high dose (10 μm)
was used for both LEN and Thal in our model [1, 33].
Figure 8 represents the effects of all three drugs on each
type of cells. The growing rates for the untreated MIC
and MM were obviously increased following time; Once
BTZ was delivered to bone marrow, the populations of
MIC and MM were sharply killed (Figure 8A–8B). As a
widely used immunomodulatory drug for the treatment of
multiple myeloma, LEN re-activates the immune system
in bone marrow, resulting in suppression of Treg cells and
activation of CD8+ T cells [12, 36]. Compared with BTZ
and Thal, LEN effectively increased the proliferation of
CD8+ T cells and inhibited the proliferation and function of
Tregs (Figure 8C–8D). Considering the special inhibiting
effects to SDF-1/CXCR4 signaling pathway in MM [1],
Thal indirectly inhibits the proliferation of myeloma cells
by regulating the SDF-1-trigged stiffness of BMSC and
further decreases the secretion of TGFβ from BMSC.

Model validation
The simulation results from our HABM model were
validated using experimental results from our laboratory
and previously reported studies. We firstly modeled
MIC progression in the microenvironment without the
immune system and compared our results with the ABM
model reported by Su, et al. [11]. When the immune
system was absent, the simulated MIC populations in
a microenvironment with BMSCs was expanded 5.98
times after 4 weeks (Figure 7A), which is consistent with
the experimental observations reported in Feng’s work
[9], and is also close to the predicted results in Su, et al’s
model [11]. However, the HABM model reflects more
pathogenesis-associated factors. For example, (1) HABM
is able to demonstrate the significant difference of myeloma
development in the microenvironment with/without the
immune cells (Supplementary Figure S5); and (2) tumor
growth is much slower in the microenvironment with antitumor immune response (Supplementary Figure S5). Thus,
the computational models with the immune system will
lead to a more accurate prediction of tumor development
and drug treatment effects.
In the absence of the immune cells, we then
predicted that the response of myeloma cells treated by
5 nM BTZ was close to the experimental outcomes
(Figure 7B). The predicted cell viability of MIC cells
on the day 6 after treatment was reduced 89.2%, which
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7654

Oncotarget

Figure 8A–8B show that the treatment with Thal induced
suppressive effects on both MIC and MM cells. Together,
these simulating results suggest that: (1) BTZ alone
resulted a significant killing in the cell numbers of MIC and
MM; (2) LEN or Thal alone didn’t lead to a significantly
kill of the tumor cells but to recover the immune system.

strategy should consider multiple potential targets in
bone marrow for complete clinical responses. Here, we
focused on the BTZ-based combined effects, in which
chemotherapy and immunotherapy drugs were delivered
to multiple myeloma in bone marrow, simultaneously.
Figure 9 shows three strategies of drug-combinations
and the corresponding effects on myeloma growth and
immune response simulated by our model. Treatment
with multi-drug presents obvious stronger effect than that
with a single drug. This is consistent with the Wang’s
work [37]. The treatment efficacy on multiple myeloma
with BTZ plus Thal is better than that with BTZ plus LEN
(Figure 9A–9B). Triple combination with BTZ, LEN, and
Thal results in the lowest survival rate of both MIC and

Combined drug effects on disease development
As shown in Figure 8, treatment multiple myeloma
with individual drug didn’t obtain desired effects [35]. In
this section, we simulated the combined drug effects on
myeloma development to investigate optimal therapeutic
strategies. Our rationale is that an optimal therapeutic

Figure 7: Comparison of simulation results and experiment observation. The simulation results of MIC populations (A)

myeloma cell viability after treatment with BTZ (B) LEN-induced CD8+ T cell proliferation (C) the suppressive effects of Tregs on CD8+
proliferation, and CTL-induced lysis of myeloma (E) under Myeloma-BMSC were compared with published experiment results.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7655

Oncotarget

MM cells (Figure 9A–9B). The enhanced anti-tumor effect
appears to be due to the increased CD8+ T cells activity.
Combined treatment with BTZ, LEN, and Thal maximizes
leads to a quick increase in the population of CD8+ T cells
(Figure 9C), and a suppression in the proliferation and
function of Tregs (Figure 9D). Together, these findings
indicate that the combined therapy with three drugs (BTZ,
LEN, and Thal) results in an excellent treatment response,
which is due to a direct antitumor effect and enhances the
host’s antitumor immune responses, simultaneously.

Here, we defined synergy effect index (Ci,j,k) of
three-drug combination as following:
Ci, j,k =

Di D jk + D j Dik + Dk Dij − 2Di D j Dk

(1)

Di, j,k

Where i, j, and k are the doses for BTZ, LEN, and
Thal, respectively, and i, j, k ∈ {1,…,10} . D denotes the
survival ratio of myeloma cells after treatment by drugs.
Di, Dj, and Dk,represent the cell viability after treated
with single drug; and Dik, Dij, and Djkwith two drugs. In
formula (1), the numerator and denominator indicates the
expected response effects [38] and simulated effects of
triple-combination, respectively. The effect is synergistic
if the value of Ci, j, k > 1, antagonistic if Ci, j, k < 1, and
additive if Ci, j, k = 1. We presented four cases about the
synergy effects of three-drug combination (Supplementary
Figure  S6). For example, we randomly set Thal with
dose level 10, the synergy has been obviously found
between BTZ (level 1 to 7) and LEN (level 1 to 10) in
Supplementary Figure S6A; It also consistent with some
previous works that LEN potentiates the activity of BTZ
in preclinical studies [35, 39, 40]. If the dose of BTZ is
low, the synergy effects occurred when the doses of Thal
and LEN are increased (Supplementary Figure S6–S6D).
When the dose of LEN is low (immune system was not

Drug synergy evaluation
We tested the combined effects of three
representative drugs, BTZ, LEN, and Thal, to examine if
induction of direct tumor cell apoptosis, disruption of the
MIC-BMSC interactions and enhancement of anti-tumor
immune response have clinical potentials for multiple
myeloma treatment. For each drug, 11 doses (0 as no drug,
1–10 levels from 0.1 × to 1 × to the original dose) were
selected and the full combinations of these three drugs
were explored for drug efficacies. Each combinatorial
condition was simulated for 200 times at 300 time points
(600 hours) for 5 cell types, and totally 266,200 data sets
were generated. For each combined strategy, the means of
200 replicates were used for further analysis.

Figure 8: The treatment effects of single drug on four types of cells. The simulation results of single drug treatment effect on
MIC (A) MM (B) CD8+ T cells (C) and Tregs (D) were compared with three strategies.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7656

Oncotarget

activated), the synergy effects was induced when Thal is
increased (Supplementary Figure S6C).

We also used the well-defined SDF-1-induced chemophysical communications between MICs and BMSCs
in our HABM model and simplified the lineage process
MICPCMMTMM by using MICMM [49]. For the model
structure, we borrowed the idea of hybrid model from
Solovyev’s work, which combines ODEs and ABM in a
single computational system [43].
Our contributions are summarized as below:
Firstly, Su, et al. didn’t take the effects of immune
system into consideration, which plays a key role in tumor
progression and drug resistance in human. Our work is
the first one to study systemic modeling of tumor growth
and immune response within an integrated 3D system.
We creatively added two components “CD8+ T Cell” and
“Treg” in our model to represent a basic immune system
with key functions, including CTL-mediated target cell
lysis, and Treg-induced suppression of CTL proliferation.
Secondly, comparing with the two-dimensional
hybrid model developed by Solovyev et al., our 3D hybrid
multi-scale model mimics signal transduction processes
at the intracellular scale, stochastic cell behavior at the
intercellular scale, and the diffusion of growth factors and
drugs within the microenvironment at the tissue scale.
Thirdly, we defined the synergy index of the threedrug combinations and predicted the combined effects
of three drugs with multiple doses in an ABM system.

DISCUSSION
This work focused on studying the effects of cellcell interaction on myeloma development in bone marrow
microenvironment, and cast new light on the strategies to
overcome immune suppression and improve the relapse
of multiple myeloma. The central hypothesis of this
work is that myeloma development in the bone marrow
is promoted by: (1) the positive feedback loop between
MICs and BMSCs via SDF-1 and the increased stiffness
in the BMSCs niche; (2) cell adhesion-mediated immune
resistance against CTL function induced by TGFβ. These
are the main reasons responsible for immune tolerance
[3], drug resistance and cancer relapse [11], and have been
successfully covered in our hybrid multi-scale agent-based
model.
We are the first to study systemic modeling of tumor
growth, drug response, and immune response within an
integrated 3D system (Figure 1). In the above section, we
briefly introduced one of our previously reported works
(Su, et al.) using an ABM model to simulate the effects of
SDF-1-induced chemo-physical communications among
MICs and BMSCs on myeloma lineage process [11].

Figure 9: The effects of combined treatment on four types of cells. The simulation results of multiple drug treatment effect on
MIC (A) MM (B) CD8+ T cells (C) and Tregs (D) were compared with three strategies.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7657

Oncotarget

While most of previous models only studied the synergy
effects between two drugs in the ABM models or signaling
pathway networks [45–48].
In our HABM model, an ODE system modeled the
SDF-1-triggered signal transduction process to determine
the changes in the biophysical property (stiffness) of
BMSCs (Figure 2A and Supplementary Figure S7). The
increased stiffness in BMSCs promoted the proliferation
of MICs, which was also processed by another ODE
system (Figure 2B and Supplementary Figure S4). In the
result section, we introduced the local sensitivity analyses
of parameters in ODEs by increasing or decreasing
one parameter at a time. Moreover, we discussed the
uncertainty analysis [44] for all the parameters.

multiple myeloma [37]. Their analysis suggests that BTZ
plus LEN or BTZ plus Thal resulted a significant increase
in the clinical responses of patients compared with those
received a single drug. Our simulated results also indicated
that BTZ-based combined treatments were more efficient
than the single drug strategy (Figures 8–9). In addition, we
found that predicted survival outcomes from the combined
therapy with three drugs were greatly improved (Figure 9),
consistent with the results from clinic indicating that the
use of BTZ, LEN and Thal dramatically changed outcomes
for patients with relapsed myeloma [41]. Our simulations
indicate that the combined therapy with three drugs (BTZ,
LEN, and Thal) results in an excellent treatment response
rather than other combinations. In addition, the maximal
dose of BTZ, LEN, and Thal simulated in our model
were 5 nM [2], 10 μM [33], and 10 μM [1], respectively.
Clearly, this model facilitates us to identify the optimal
dose setting of combination therapeutic options for
improving survival outcomes.
Although the parameters of the HABM model
were tuned manually or determined from some related
literatures, the proposed model under different contexts is
capable to re-capture the experimental observations with
high precision.
(1) Pro-oncogenetic myeloma-associated BMSC
microenvironment. Without the intervention of immune
system, the MICs population was boosted in myelomaassociated bone marrow and thus driven the development
of myeloma (Figure 7A).
(2) The response of myeloma cell to BTZ treatment.
The predicted dose effects of BTZ on cell survival
(Figure 7B) was consistent with the experimental results
(Supplementary Figure S3 and [2]), indicating that our
model has the capability to predict the drug responses of
myeloma.
(3) The efficacy of LEN in activating CD8+ T cells.
When the representative IMiD drug LEN was delivered
with a wide range of doses, CD8+ T cells were efficiently
activated and the proliferation was promoted obviously.
The predicted outcomes and the experimental observations
were very close (Figure 7C).
(4) The suppressive effects of Tregs on CD8+
proliferation. Figure 7D represents that the suppressive
effects of Tregs on CD8+ T cell proliferation without any
drug perturbation [34].
(5) CD8+ T cells mediated lysis of myeloma cells.
Myeloma cells were significantly lysed by the cytotoxic
effect of CTL when CD8+ T cell population was expanded
[3]. Our predicted results were consistent with these
observations (Figure 7E).
In summary, we proposed a 3D hybrid multi-scale
agent-based model (HABM) to reveal the molecular
mechanisms associated with cancer development and
immune response in an integrated tumor microenvironment.
In the HABM system, not only cell-cell interactions were
modeled for describing various types of intercellular

Uncertainty analysis
Based on the estimated parameters shown in the
Supplementary Tables S2–S3, we obtained two baseline
ODE models. We then generated the testing samples, in
which all of the parameters were increased or decreased
randomly with uniform probability within a given range
(5%). Each testing sample denoted a set of new parameters,
which was then used to execute the related ODE model.
Considering the search space of testing samples is quite
large, we randomly generated nine statistical experiments
with different sample sizes, and evaluated the variability of
model results with each sample set. The numbers of testing
samples in nine experiments were significantly different
(e.g. 30, 100, 200, 500, 1000, 2000, 5000, 8000, and
10000). Supplementary Figure S8 shows the variability of
stiffness for all testing cases in each experiment. The mean
and standard deviation were normalized by the output
from the baseline model (the green line in Supplementary
Figure S8). When the size of a sample set is larger than
5000, the mean values of outputs converge to the steady
state and the changes in outputs would be less than 4%
eventually. Supplementary Figure S9 shows the variability
of survival rate and adhesion rate for all testing cases in
each experiment. Similarity, when the sample size is
larger than 5000, the mean values converge to the steady
state and the percentage changes of outputs in all cases
eventually would be less than 5%. Our proteomic data was
represented as fold changes comparing with the time point
0 (Tables S1–S2 in Supplementary Data File), thus, we
executed all the testing cases on each ODE model with
the same initial state of the related network (each protein
node was assiggend as “1”). In summary, Supplementary
Figures S8–S9 indicate that the constructed pathway
models in BMSC and MIC cell agents are stable.
We also provide a novel computational platform
for evaluation of the cellular responses to the single and
combined drug treatment. Wang. et al. performed a metaanalysis for the efficacy and safety of combined treatments
(BTZ plus LEN/Thal vs BTZ or LEN/Thal) containing
regimens as the induction therapies in newly diagnosed
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7658

Oncotarget

Reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase
chain reaction (RT-qPCR)

communications, but also the key signaling pathway
networks were stimulated for elaborating the intracellular
signal transduction processes. Under different perturbed
conditions, the predicted outcomes of HABM model
were very close to the experimental observations, which
proved that the simulation results of our model are reliable.
This is the first time to model the cancer development in
a complicated system with immune component, so that
the stimulated microenvironment was more close to the
condition in vivo rather than previous works. This study
also provided a novel computational tool to quickly predict
the drug treatment response of multiple myeloma, which is
good for us to find the best treatment strategy of multi-drug
and the optimal dose combination.

Total RNA was extracted from the collected
myeloma cells using Qiagen mini RNA extraction kit
(Qiagen), according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
A total of 1 μg RNA was reverse-transcribed into cDNA
using a SuperScriptIII first-strand synthesis system (Life
Technology). RT-qPCR was performed using an Applied
Biosystems Fast 7500, with endogenous GADPH used as a
reference. The gene expression levels of transforming growth
factor (TGFβ) and CXCL12 (SDF-1) were determined in
each group. The primers used in this study designed and
synthesized by Integrated DNA technologies. Primers were
as follows: GADPH, 5′-3′GAGTCAACGGATTTGGTCGT
(forward) and 5′-3′ TTGATTTTGGAGGGATCTCG
(reverse); TGFβ, 5′-3′ CGTGGAGCTGTACCAGAAATAC
(forward) and 5′-3′ CACAACTCCGGTGACATCAA
(reverse); and CXCL12, 5′-3′ CAGAGCCAACGTCAAGCA
(forward) and 5′-3′ AGGTACTCTTGGATCCAC (reverse).
The cycle conditions were as follows: 1 min at 60°C, 10 min
denaturation at 95°C followed by a total of 40 cycles 95°C
for 15 sec and 60°C for 1 min.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Experiment
Cells and culture
Myeloma cells
Human myeloma cell line RPMI8226 was obtained
from the American Type Culture Collection. RPMI 8226
cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 (Hyclone) containing
10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (Sigma),
2 mmol/L l-glutamine (Invitrogen), 100 U/mL penicillin
and 100 μg/mL streptomycin (Invitrogen).

Proteomics data for SDF-1 signaling in myeloma
BMSC
To model the SDF-1 signaling network of BMSC
cells shown in Figure 2A, we collected phosphor-protein
data from three sources. (1) The myeloma BMSCs were
treated with SDF-1 (100 ng/ml) and the protein levels of
p-FAK, p-MYL2, and p-RhoA were detected at 0, 5, and
10 minutes shown in the Choi’s work [10]. (2) We did
the similar experiment with SDF-1 (100 ng/ml) and also
obtained the phosphorylation of p-FAK, p-MYL2, and
p-RhoA at 0, 15, and 60 minutes [22]. (3) We did the RPPA
analysis for the myeloma BMSCs treated with 100 nM/mL
of SDF-1. This RPPA dataset covered four time points:
0, 5, 10, and 15 minutes. From this dataset, we collected
the phosphorylated protein levels of ERK and MEK at
above four time points. The phosphor-state of each protein
was normalized against its expression at time point 0.

Bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs)
Myeloma BMSCs were isolated from remaining
bone marrow samples of myeloma patients for routine
diagnostic. Cells in the bone marrow sample were obtained
by Ficoll density gradient centrifugation (AXIS-SHIELD).
The cells were then plated in the tissue culture flasks at a
concentration of 106 cells/mL in Mesencult basal medium
supplemented with MSC stimulatory supplements (both
from Life technology). After 24 h incubation at 37°C
in a 5% CO2 humidified atmosphere, non-adherent cells
were removed, and the adherent fraction was cultured in
fresh medium. Cells used for future experiment were no
more than 10 passages. Normal BMSCs cell line HS5
was obtained from ATCC, and cultured in Mesencult
basal medium supplemented with MSC stimulatory
supplements.

Proteomics data of MIC
Similarly, we obtained the phosphorylation of key
proteins for modeling the signaling network of MIC shown
in Figure 2B. Side population of myeloma cells seeded
on 100 Pa and 400 Pa surfaces and the protein samples
collected at 0, 30, 60, and overnight for RPPA analysis. For
each protein, the expression levels are normalized against
its t = 0 min level. Finally, we collected the expressions
of FAK, PI3K, AKT, JNK, c-Jun, and NFKB from this
RPPA dataset because they were covered in the topology
of network shown in Figure 2B. The details of the above
proteomic data were described in Supplementary Data File.

Coculture of myeloma cells and BMSCs
For coculture experiments, myeloma cells were
seeded onto BMSCs pre-cultured on 6-well plates. Cells
were cultured in RPMI 1640 with 10% FBS at 37°C
in a humidified atmosphere of 21%O2 normal or 5%
O2 hypoxic condition. Suspended myeloma cells were
collected by repeated gently rinsing mixture. BMSCs were
scraped for following RNA extraction.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7659

Oncotarget

Cell population

behaviors. As shown in the Figure 10, cell behaviors are
simulated by probability-based rule implementation. A
cell senses the hints in its neighborhood such as stiffness,
local cytokines (SDF-1, or TGFβ) and drugs (Bortezomib,
Lenalidomide, and Thalidomide) and adjusts itself
with the imbedded signaling pathways, and outputs the
corresponding changes in its cell behaviors, including
proliferation, survival, differentiation, migration, and
cytokine secretion rate. Cell decision is then determined by
rolling a dice and compared with the probability threshold
of a cell behavior. Details of each cell behavior for each
agent as well as the corresponding rule are discussed
in the following sections as well as the Supplementary
Information.

MIC growth and response to BTZ on the premade
collagen gels with various stiffness
Two hundred of the side population (SP) of U226
cells were mixed with premade collagen gel with various
concentration as shown in Supplementary Figure S3A.
The Cells were allowed to grow in the gel for 1 week
and then treated with or without 5 nM BTZ for six days.
Cell viability was determined using MTT assay. The
details of relative cell viabilities were represented in the
Supplementary Figure S3B.

Adhesion of MIC Cells on and the premade
collagen gels

Intracellular scale

The Side population of U226 cells was seeded on
the premade collagen gel with various stiffness. Twenty
four hours after incubation, the attached cells were
trypsinized and counted. The details were represented as
Supplementary Figure S4A–4B.

The biomechanical phenotype for each BMSC
agent is determined using our developed ODE system to
describe the effect of SDF-1/CXCR4 signaling pathway
on local stiffness in response to the changes of in-situ
SDF-1 concentration. SDF1-triggerred BMSC stiffness is
described into details the following section.
The survival rate of MIC cells is determined by
both the local ECM stiffness and the local doses of BTZ
via a developed ODE system. Adhesion rate represents
the probability of a MIC cell attaching on a BMSC agent
with various stiffness. The ODE system for adhesion and
survival of MIC cells has been described into details the
following section.
The response of MM cells to local stiffness in terms of
the possibilities of cells to enter the proliferation, apoptosis,
and migration status are calculated using Hill functions.
Similarly, Hill functions are also applied for denmondtration
of the probabilities of proliferation, apoptosis, and migration
for immune-related cell agents (CD8+ and Treg). Cell
decision making process is defined by the agent rules with
such probabilities as the major inputs.

Agent-based model of myeloma development
We defined five types of agents in the ABM
model to represent BMSC, MIC, MM, CD8+, and Treg,
respectively (Figure 1). ABM a simplified model used
for predict the effects of cell-cell interactions on growth
and drug response of myeloma cells in a simulated bone
marrow microenvironment. We initialized the bone marrow
microenvironment as a cylinder 3D rectangular framework
with evenly scattered BMSCs in the 3D extracellular matrix
and central distribution of mixed MIC, MM, CD8+, and
Treg compartments as a sphere. This multi-scale modeling
includes intracellular, intercellular and tissue scales, which
are illustrated in the Figure 1, and described into details in
the following sections. Detailed flowcharts of each agent
are illustrated in the Supplementary Information.

Cell fate determination

Stochastic simulation of cell behaviors

Once a MIC has decided to re-enter cell cycle, its
microenvironment will be a key determinor for its fate.
A MIC can either devide into two daughter cells, known

The Markov Chain Monte Carlo approach in
the ABM model was used to simulate individual cell

Figure 10: The stochastic simulation of cell behaviors.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7660

Oncotarget

as self-renewal, or differentiate into two MM cells.
The probability of each fate is calculated using the Hill
functions, and the decision making is realized by the die
casting simulation.

cell cycle arrest or apoptosis. Therefore, we defined the
corresponding rules to implement Treg-induced inhibition
of CD8+ T cell proliferation. If a CD8+ T cell is in a
certain phase of cycle, our rules would be paused once. In
addition, a Treg cell may directly induce apoptosis of the
adjacent CD8+ T cell. The selection of cell cycle arrest or
apoptosis will be determined by dice rolling.

Intercellular scale
In response to the changes in the biomechanical
properties of its microenvironment, a myeloma cell (MIC
or MM) will proliferate, migrate, become quiescent, or
undergo death process. We described those responses
at the intercellular scale. In addition, a myeloma cell
might be killed by CD8+ T cell in the neighborhood.
Furthermore, when the Treg cells migrate towards CD8+ T
cells, the proliferation of CD8+ T cells will be suppressed,
due to cell cycle arrest or apoptosis of these cells.

Tissue scale
In the tissue scale of this HABM model, the
secretion of SDF-1 from MICs and the diffusion of SDF1 in the 3D ECM defined the dynamic 3D distribution
of SDF-1 concentration. TGFβ can be secreted from
both BMSC and MM, and the diffusion of TGFβ in the
ECM also defined the dynamic 3D distribution of TGFβ,
which involved in the regulation of the immune system.
SDF-1 and TGFβ are uniformly initialized at the start with
Dirichlet boundary. The drug concentration determined
the chemical microenvironment in bone marrow. In
addition, the tissue stiffness defined by BMSC contraction
determined the biophysical microenvironment.

Migration
A non-M-phase cell will migrate if it can find a
free space nearby. In the BM, MIC cells tend to migrate
to the surface of the BMSC cells and attach on it. Their
proliferation will be promoted with the increased stiffness
of BMSCs. CD8+ T cells are apt to move towards the
places of where myeloma cells reside. Treg cells migrate to
CD8+ T cells and affect the proliferation of these effector
cells in a manner of cell cycle arrest or apoptosis. The
migration was governed by space availability, migration
speed, and stochastic effects using Hill functions and diecasting simulation.

ODE-based models of intracellular signaling
response
ODE system of SDF-1-triggerred BMSC stiffness
Each BMSC agent has encapsulated signaling
transduction functions to determine its biomechanical
phenotype switch. In response to the in-silu relative SDF-1
concentration, the binding of SDF-1 to the CXCR4 results
a SDF-1/CXCR4 signaling pathway activation, which
regulates the local stiffness. To describe this dynamic
process, we developed an ODE-based dynamic model to
predict the biomechanical properties of BMSCs based on
the local concentration of SDF-1.
The ODE system of SDF-1/CXCR4 signaling
pathways has the following form:

Division of MIC and MM agents
If M-phase cells are found at least at one free
location within the searching distance, there cells will
divide. It follows the same migration rules, but has a much
smaller migration distance. Thus, the de novo daughter
cells will always be next to the parental cells. If no space
is available, the cells will remain in M-phase and obtain
entrance in the next cycle.

Lysis of MIC and MM
Once recognizing the location of myeloma cells
(MIC and MM) in its neighborhood, the CD8+ T cell will
migrate towards them. When a CD8+ cell is adjacent to a
certain myeloma cell, the lysis will occur. The myelomaBMSC interactions can promote the myeloma cells escape
from the immune system, therefore, we also defined the
corresponding rules to reflect a fact that CD8+ cells prefer
to kill the target tumor cells which are not attaching on
the BMSCs.

Suppression of CD8+ T cell proliferation

d [ PI 3K ]
[ SDF1] − d PI 3K (1)
= k1
]
1[
dt
H1 + [ SDF1]
d [ MEK ]
[ SDF1] − d MEK (2)
= k2
]
2[
dt
H 2 + [ SDF1]
d [ FAK ]
[ PI 3K ] − d FAK (3)
= k3
]
3[
dt
H 3 + [ PI 3K ]
d [ RhoA]
dt

[ PI 3K ] + k [ MEK ] − d RhoA
] (4)
5
4[
H 4 + [ PI 3K ]
H 5 + [ MEK ]

d [ ERK ]
[ MEK ] − d ERK (5)
= k6
]
5[
dt
H 6 + [ MEK ]
d [ MYL 2]

Tregs suppresses the proliferation of CD8+ T cells
to balance the immune response in a system by including
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

= k4

dt

7661

= k7

[ RhoA] + k [ ERK ] − d MYL2
]
8
6[
H 7 + [ RhoA]
H 8 + [ ERK ]

(6)

Oncotarget

d [ stiffness ]
dt

k9
=

[ FAK ]

H 9 + [ FAK ]

+ k10

MYL 2
− d 7 [ stiffness ] 
H10 + [ MYL 2]

As mentioned above, our phosphor-proteomics data
covered the key signaling proteins (pMEK, pFAK, pRhoA,
pERK, and pMYL2), which were involved in this SDF1/CXCR4 signaling network. The value of the unique
input node for SDF-1 is a conditional variable, which is
un-changed from 0 to 60 min. The node “stiffness” is the
output variable of this ODE system. Choi et al reported that
the average stiffness of myeloma BMSC will increase from
400 pa to 530pa after treatment with SDF-1 (100 ng/ml)
in vitro. However, the real concentration of local SDF-1 in
bone marrow is lower; therefore, we considered that 530pa
is the maximum output value in our ODE system at 60 min
after SDF-1 stimulation. All above parameters involved in
this ODE system were estimated by optimizing formula (8)
via GA algorithm:
*
=
Θ arg min
Θ

∑

i∈I 1,t∈T 1

d [ Rac ]

(7)

t
t
X i −
X i (Θ) (8)

dt

= k2

[ PI 3K ] − d Rac (10)
FAK
+ k3
]
2[
H 2 + [ FAK ]
H 3 + [ PI 3K ]

d [ PI 3K ]
[ FAK ] − d PI 3K (11)
= k4
]
3[
dt
H 4 + [ FAK ]
d [ AKT ]
[ PI 3K ] − d AKT
= k5
] (12)
4[
dt
H 5 + [ PI 3K ]
d [ JNK ]
[ Rac ] − d JNK
= k6
] (13)
5[
dt
H 6 + [ Rac ]
d [ cJUN ]
[ JNK ] − d cJUN
= k7
] (14)
6[
dt
H 7 + [ JNK ]
d [ NFKB ]
dt

=k8

[ Rac ]

H 8 + [ Rac ]

+ k9

[ AKT ]

H 9 + [ AKT ]

− d 7 [ NFKB ] (15)

d [ Adhesion ]
[cJUN ] − d Adhesion 
= k10
]
8[
dt
H10 + [ cJUN ]

(16)

d [ Survial ]
[ NFKB ] − K
D1
Where X it and Xˆ it (Θ) denote the measurement
= k11
− d9 [ Survival ]  (17)
BTZ
dt
H11 + [ NFKB ]
H BTZ + D1
from the experiments and the theoretical results obtained
from ODEs model of protein i at time point t. The
All above parameters involved in this ODE system
parameter vector Θ ={k 1, H 1, d 1,...., k 10, H 10, d 7}
were estimated by optimizing formula (8) via GA
in above formulas (1–7) can be obtained by formula
algorithm.
(8). The set I1is the indexes of observed proteins in
t
*
t
Y i −Y i ( ϒ) (18)
ϒ arg min
the signaling network of BMSCs, and time series =
set
ϒ
i∈I 2,t∈T 2
T 1 = { 0, 5 min, 10 min, 15 min, 60 min} includes all the time
t
Where Yi and Yˆi t ( ϒ) denote the measurement from
points in experimental data (Table S2 in Supplementary
the experiments and the theoretical results obtained from
Data File). Supplementary Table S2 represents the
ODEs model of protein i at time point t. The parameter
estimated values of all parameters. The fitting accuracy
of the predicted and measured values of key proteins is
vector ϒ ={k 1, H 1, d 1,..., k BTZ , H BTZ , d 9} in above
shown in Supplementary Figure S7.
formula (9–17) can be obtained by formula (18). The
set I2is the indexes of observed proteins in the signaling
network of MICs, and T2 = { 0, 0.5 hr, 1hr, 24 hr, 96 hr}
ODE system of MIC adhesion and survival
includes all the time points in experimental data (Table S1
The adhesion and survival of MIC agents were
in Supplementary Data File). Supplementary Table S3
also simulated using an ODE model. As the population
represents the estimated values of all parameters. The
data shown in Supplementary Figures S3–S4, we can see
prediction of growth and drug resistance of SP U226 cells
that (1) increase of stiffness promotes the survival rate of
with different stiffness were shown in Supplementary
MIC cells; (2) MICs tend to adhere on the stiffer BMSCs
Figure S3. Similarly, the adhesion of SP U226 cells
rather than the softer ones or non-BMSC positions. Here,
towards different stiffness was inferred by ODEs
we assumed that each cell has the same probabilities for
(Supplementary Figure S4).
survival and adhension as the total population. Therefore,
we developed an ODE dynamic model to predict the
Using hill functions in the intracellular scale
probabilities of survival and adhesion of MIC cell based
Except the ODE systems were applied to model the
on the local stiffness. The maximal value of input node
intracellular
signaling networks in BMSC and MIC cells
“stiffness” was 530pa. Adhesion and survival rate of MICs
(Figure
2),
Hill
functions were used to simulate the signal
were both predicted at 24 and 96 hours. The states (at 0.5
transduction
of
other cells and further determine the cell
and 1 hours) of other proteins involved in this signaling
behaviors
(Supplementary
Text).
network were normalized against its expression in 0 hour
level. The ODE system has the following form:

∑

Stem cell fate determination

d [ FAK ]
[ stiffness ] − d FAK (9)
= k1
]
1[
dt
H1 + [ stiffness ]
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Once a MIC decided to enter cell cycle, it either
generates two daughter cells, known as self-renewal, or to
7662

Oncotarget

two MM cells, known as differentiation. The probability
of cell fate was determined by stiffness-triggered MIC
proliferation pathways via hill function, and the decision
of each MIC cell was also realized by die casting
simulation as mentioned above.

at Wake Forest School of Medicine to provide valuable
discussions.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Proliferation fates of MM

FUNDING

The fates of intermediate cell agents were
determined by the probabilities of proliferation, which
reflected the effects of cell neighborhood characters such
as stiffness and cytokine concentration, and the current
cell cycle status. When maximum renewal limit reached,
a MM cell will die. According to the myeloma initiating
cell hypothesis, only MIC can self-renew and proliferate
without limits, however, the defined constant LGN is the
maximum passage number of MM cells.

This work is funded by NIH U01CA166886-03 (Zhou)
and NIH AR069395-01A1 (Zhou) and 1U54TR001420-01
(Zhou). This project is also partially funded by NSFC
No.61373105.

REFERENCES
  1.	 Oliveira AM, Maria DA, Metzger M, Linardi C, Giorgi RR,
Moura F, Martinez GA, Bydlowski SP, Novak  EM.
Thalidomide treatment down-regulates SDF-1alpha and
CXCR4 expression in multiple myeloma patients. Leuk Res.
2009; 33:970–973.
  2.	 Campanella A, Santambrogio P, Fontana F, Frenquelli M,
Cenci S, Marcatti M, Sitia R, Tonon G, Camaschella C.
Iron increases the susceptibility of multiple myeloma cells
to bortezomib. Haematologica. 2013; 98:971–979.
  3.	 de Haart SJ, van de Donk NW, Minnema MC, Huang JH,
Aarts-Riemens T, Bovenschen N, Yuan H, Groen RW,
McMillin DW, Jakubikova J, et al. Accessory cells of the
microenvironment protect multiple myeloma from T-cell
cytotoxicity through cell adhesion-mediated immune
resistance. Clin Cancer Res. 2013; 19:5591–5601.
  4.	 McMillin DW, Delmore J, Weisberg E, Negri JM, Geer DC,
Klippel S, Mitsiades N, Schlossman RL, Munshi NC,
Kung AL, et al. Tumor cell-specific bioluminescence platform
to identify stroma-induced changes to anticancer drug activity.
Nat Med. 2010; 16:483–489.
  5.	 McMillin DW, Delmore J, Negri J, Ooi M, Klippel S,
Miduturu CV, Gray NS, Richardson PG, Anderson KC,
Kung AL, et al. Microenvironmental influence on preclinical activity of polo-like kinase inhibition in multiple
myeloma: implications for clinical translation. PLoS One.
2011; 6:e20226.
  6.	 Matsui W, Huff CA, Wang Q, Malehorn MT, Barber  J,
Tanhehco Y, Smith BD, Civin CI, Jones RJ. Characterization
of clonogenic multiple myeloma cells. Blood. 2004;
103:2332–2336.
  7.	 Matsui W, Wang Q, Barber JP, Brennan S, Smith BD,
Borrello I, McNiece I, Lin L, Ambinder RF, Peacock C,
et al. Clonogenic multiple myeloma progenitors, stem cell
properties, and drug resistance. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:190–197.
  8.	 Abe M, Harada T, Matsumoto T. Concise review: Defining
and targeting myeloma stem cell-like cells. Stem cells.
2014; 32:1067–1073.
  9.	 Feng Y, Wen J, Mike P, Choi DS, Eshoa C, Shi ZZ, Zu Y,
Chang CC. Bone marrow stromal cells from myeloma

Proliferation and survival fates of CD8 T cells
and Treg
+

The proliferation rate of CD8+ T cell depends
on Treg population and the local concentration of
TGFβ, which was also simulated by Hill Function. The
proliferation and survival fates of a Treg agent were both
determined by the local concentration of TGFβ via Hill
Functions. When an immunomodulatory drug, such as
LEN, was applied to treat MM/MIC, it would lead to
a suppression of Tregs and stimulation of CD8+ T cells
prolifeartion.

Model implementation
The main components of ABM model were designed
using the conception of “Object-Oriented Programming”
and were achieved with C++. The ODEs modules of
intracellular signaling pathways (in BMSC and MIC) were
implemented by Fortran ODE Solver (DLSODE [42]) and
were called in the ABM model. The proposed model was
debugged and implemented under Linux environment
on the platform of Texas Advanced Computing Center
(TACC). All of the parameters in ABM model were tuned
after running the system 200 times to fit the training data.

Abbreviations
BM: Bone Marrow, MM: Multiple Myeloma,
ABM: Agent-based Model, ODE: Ordinary Differential
Equation, HABM: Hybrid multi-scale Agent-based Model,
MIC: Myeloma Initiating Cell, BTZ: Bortezomib, LEN:
Lenalidomide, Thal: Thalidomide.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Kun Wei, Hua Tan, and Ruoying Chen
at the Center for Bioinformatics and Systems Biology
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7663

Oncotarget

patients support the growth of myeloma stem cells. Stem
Cells Dev. 2010; 19:1289–1296.

22.	 Wu D, Guo XY, Su J, Chen RY, Berenzon D, Guthold M,
Bonin K, Zhao WL, Zhou XB. CD138-negative myeloma
cells regulate mechanical properties of bone marrow
stromal cells through SDF-1/CXCR4/AKT signaling
pathway. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015; 1853:338–347.

10.	 Choi DS, Stark DJ, Raphael RM, Wen J, Su J, Zhou X,
Chang CC, Zu Y. SDF-1alpha stiffens myeloma bone
marrow mesenchymal stromal cells through the activation of
RhoA-ROCK-Myosin II. Int J Cancer. 2015; 136:E219–229.

23.	 Wang LQ, Lin ZZ, Zhang HX, Shao B, Xiao L,
Jiang  HG, Zhuge QC, Xie LK, Wang B, Su DM, et al.
Timing and Dose Regimens of Marrow Mesenchymal
Stem Cell Transplantation Affect the Outcomes and
Neuroinflammatory Response After Ischemic Stroke. Cns
Neurosci Ther. 2014; 20:317–326.

11.	 Su J, Zhang L, Zhang W, Choi DS, Wen J, Jiang B,
Chang CC, Zhou X. Targeting the biophysical properties
of the myeloma initiating cell niches: a pharmaceutical
synergism analysis using multi-scale agent-based modeling.
PLoS One. 2014; 9:e85059.

24.	 Burr SP, Dazzi F, Garden OA. Mesenchymal stromal cells
and regulatory T cells: the Yin and Yang of peripheral
tolerance? Immunol Cell Biol. 2013; 91:12–18.

12.	 Gorgun G, Calabrese E, Soydan E, Hideshima T,
Perrone G, Bandi M, Cirstea D, Santo L, Hu Y, Tai YT,
et al. Immunomodulatory effects of lenalidomide and
pomalidomide on interaction of tumor and bone marrow
accessory cells in multiple myeloma. Blood. 2010;
116:3227–3237.

25.	 Peng H, Peng T, Wen J, Engler DA, Matsunami RK, Su J,
Zhang L, Chang CC, Zhou X: Characterization of p38
MAPK isoforms for drug resistance study using systems
biology approach. Bioinformatics. 2014; 30:1899–1907.

13.	 Raja KR, Hajek R. Contribution of regulatory T cells to
immunosuppression and disease progression in multiple
myeloma patients. Oncoimmunology. 2013; 2:e25619.

26.	 Feng YD, Ofek G, Choi DS, Wen JG, Hu J, Zhao H,
Zu YL, Athanasiou KA, Chang CC. Unique biomechanical
interactions between myeloma cells and bone marrow
stroma cells. Prog in Biophys Mol Biol. 2010; 103:148–
156.

14.	 Quach H, Ritchie D, Stewart AK, Neeson P, Harrison S,
Smyth MJ, Prince HM. Mechanism of action of
immunomodulatory drugs (IMiDS) in multiple myeloma.
Leukemia. 2010; 24:22–32.

27.	 Beyer M, Schultze JL. Regulatory T cells in cancer. Blood.
2006; 108:804–811.

15.	 Corral LG, Haslett PA, Muller GW, Chen R, Wong LM,
Ocampo CJ, Patterson RT, Stirling DI, Kaplan G:
Differential cytokine modulation and T cell activation by
two distinct classes of thalidomide analogues that are potent
inhibitors of TNF-alpha. J Immunol. 1999; 163:380–386.

28.	 Bao L, Lai YY, Liu YR, Qin YZ, Zhao XS, Lu XJ, Jiang Q,
Lu J, Huang XJ. CXCR4 is a good survival prognostic
indicator in multiple myeloma patients. Leuk Res. 2013;
37:1083–1088.

16.	 Schafer PH, Gandhi AK, Loveland MA, Chen RS, Man HW,
Schnetkamp PP, Wolbring G, Govinda S, Corral  LG,
Payvandi F et al. Enhancement of cytokine production and
AP-1 transcriptional activity in T cells by thalidomiderelated immunomodulatory drugs. J Pharmacol Exp Ther.
2003; 305:1222–1232.

29.	 Wang JH, Hendrix A, Hernot S, Lemaire M, De
Bruyne E, Van Valckenborgh E, Lahoutte T, De Wever O,
Vanderkerken K, Menu E. Bone marrow stromal cellderived exosomes as communicators in drug resistance in
multiple myeloma cells. Blood. 2014; 124:555–566.
30.	 Romano A, Conticello C, Cavalli M, Vetro C, La
Fauci A, Parrinello NL, Di Raimondo F. Immunological
Dysregulation in Multiple Myeloma Microenvironment.
Biomed Res Int. 2014.

17.	 Driscoll JJ, Burris J, Annunziata CM. Targeting the
proteasome with bortezomib in multiple myeloma: update
on therapeutic benefit as an upfront single agent, induction
regimen for stem-cell transplantation and as maintenance
therapy. Am J Ther. 2012; 19:133–144.

31.	 Muthu Raja KR, Kubiczkova L, Rihova L, Piskacek M,
Vsianska P, Hezova R, Pour L, Hajek R. Functionally
suppressive CD8 T regulatory cells are increased in patients
with multiple myeloma: a cause for immune impairment.
PloS One. 2012; 7:e49446.

18.	 Tridane A, Kuang Y. Modeling the interaction of cytotoxic
T lymphocytes and influenza virus infected epithelial cells.
Math Biosci and Eng. 2010; 7:171–185.
19.	 Eikenberry S, Thalhauser C, Kuang Y. Tumor-immune
interaction, surgical treatment, and cancer recurrence in
a mathematical model of melanoma. PLoS Comput Biol.
2009; 5:e1000362.

32.	 Yang Y, Shi J, Tolomelli G, Xu H, Xia J, Wang H, Zhou W,
Zhou Y, Das S, Gu Z, et al. RARalpha2 expression confers
myeloma stem cell features. Blood. 2013; 122:1437–1447.

20.	 R. A. Everett APaYK: Can Mathematical Models Predict
the outcomes of prostate cancer patients undergoing
intermittent androgen deprivation therapy? Biophys Rev
and Let. 2014; 9:173–191.

33.	 Henry JY, Labarthe MC, Meyer B, Dasgupta P,
Dalgleish  AG, Galustian C. Enhanced cross-priming
of naive CD8+ T cells by dendritic cells treated by the
IMiDs(R) immunomodulatory compounds lenalidomide
and pomalidomide. Immunology. 2013; 139:377–385.

21.	Zou W. Immunosuppressive networks in the tumour
environment and their therapeutic relevance. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2005; 5:263–274.

34.	 Karel Fostier JC, Carlo Heirman, Joeri L. Aerts, Kris
Thielemans, Rik Schots, and Brenda De Keersmaecker.:
Immunomodulatory Drugs Restore Effector Cell Immune

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7664

Oncotarget

Functions In Myeloma Patients With Low Disease Burden
After Autologous Stem Cell Transplantation. Blood. 2013; 122.

stem cells as revealed through a systems analysis of PI3K/
AKT pathway. Bioinformatics. 2014; 30:2334–2342.

35.	 Jimenez-Zepeda VH, Reece DE, Trudel S, Chen C,
Tiedemann R, Kukreti V. Lenalidomide (Revlimid),
bortezomib (Velcade) and dexamethasone for heavily
pretreated relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma. Leuk
Lymphoma. 2013; 54:555–560.

43.	 Solovyev A, Mi Q, Tzen YT, Brienza D, Vodovotz Y. Hybrid
equation/agent-based model of ischemia-induced hyperemia
and pressure ulcer formation predicts greater propensity to
ulcerate in subjects with spinal cord injury. PLoS Comput
Biol. 2013; 9:e1003070.

36.	 Sakamaki I, Kwak LW, Cha SC, Yi Q, Lerman B,
Chen J, Surapaneni S, Bateman S, Qin H: Lenalidomide
enhances the protective effect of a therapeutic vaccine and
reverses immune suppression in mice bearing established
lymphomas. Leukemia. 2014; 28:329–337.

44.	 Ligmann-Zielinska A, Kramer DB, Cheruvelil KS,
Soranno PA. Using Uncertainty and Sensitivity Analyses
in Socioecological Agent-Based Models to Improve Their
Analytical Performance and Policy Relevance. Plos One.
2014; 9.

37.	 Wang AY, Duan QH, Liu X, Ding KY, Han YS, Zhu WB,
Cai XY, Wu JS, Sun ZM. (Bortezomib plus lenalidomide/
thalidomide)- vs (bortezomib or lenalidomide/thalidomide)containing regimens as induction therapy in newly diagnosed
multiple myeloma: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled
trials. Ann Hematol. 2012; 91:1779–1784.

45.	 Wang J, Zhang L, Jing C, Ye G, Wu H, Miao H, Wu Y,
Zhou X. Multi-scale agent-based modeling on melanoma
and its related angiogenesis analysis. Theor Biol Med
Model. 2013; 10:41.
46.	 Sun X, Zhang L, Tan H, Bao J, Strouthos C, Zhou X. Multiscale agent-based brain cancer modeling and prediction
of TKI treatment response: incorporating EGFR signaling
pathway and angiogenesis. BMC Bioinformatics. 2012;
13:218.

38.	 Wood K, Nishida S, Sontag ED, Cluzel P. Mechanismindependent method for predicting response to multidrug
combinations in bacteria. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2012;
109:12254–12259.

47.	 Sun X, Bao J, Nelson KC, Li KC, Kulik G, Zhou X.
Systems modeling of anti-apoptotic pathways in prostate
cancer: psychological stress triggers a synergism pattern
switch in drug combination therapy. PLoS Comput Biol.
2013; 9:e1003358.

39.	 Mitsiades N, Mitsiades CS, Poulaki V, Chauhan D,
Richardson  PG, Hideshima T, Munshi NC, Treon  SP,
Anderson KC. Apoptotic signaling induced by
immunomodulatory thalidomide analogs in human multiple
myeloma cells: therapeutic implications. Blood. 2002;
99:4525–4530.

48.	 Sun X, Bao J, You Z, Chen X, Cui J. Modeling of signaling
crosstalk-mediated drug resistance and its implications on
drug combination. Oncotarget. 2016; 7:63995–64006. doi:
10.18632/oncotarget.11745.

40.	 Dimopoulos MA, Terpos E. Lenalidomide: an update on
evidence from clinical trials. Blood Rev. 2010; 24:S21–26.
41.	 Lonial S, Mitsiades CS, Richardson PG. Treatment options
for relapsed and refractory multiple myeloma. Clin Cancer
Res. 2011; 17:1264–1277.

49. 	Peng T, Peng H, Choi DS, Su J, Chang CC, Zhou X.
Modeling cell-cell interactions in regulating multiple
myeloma initiating cell fate. IEEE J Biomed Health Inform.
2014; 18:484–491.

42.	 Mathew S, Sundararaj S, Mamiya H, Banerjee I: Regulatory
interactions maintaining self-renewal of human embryonic

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7665

Oncotarget

