224

CORRESPONDENCE

Smaller Regional Volumes of Gray and White
Matter Demonstrated in Breast Cancer
Survivors Exposed to Adjuvant Chemotherapy

W

e read with interest the article by Inagaki and colleagues, who
reported on transient structural changes in selected areas of
the brain associated with cognitive dysfunction in patients with
breast cancer subsequent to adjuvant chemotherapy.1 Although
their article contributes to the understanding of an important, complex phenomenon, the results should be interpreted critically concerning their clinical relevance. In their study, there were
methodological limitations, which were conﬁrmed by the authors
themselves, in addition to discrepancies with regard to previously
published ﬁndings.1
The majority of the patients studied by Inagaki et al. did not
receive a recommended, standard chemotherapy regimen (mainly
cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and 5-ﬂuorouracil regimens). In
addition, signiﬁcantly more patients received adjuvant endocrine
treatment among those who were exposed to chemotherapy. This
should be taken into account, because cognitive dysfunction also
has been observed in the context of endocrine treatment.2 Finally,
cognitive impairments have been observed before the start of adjuvant treatment in patients with breast cancer,3 which was not taken
into consideration in the report by Inagaki and colleagues.
We agree with the authors that the potential impact of adjuvant
chemotherapy on the cerebral structure of breast cancer patients is
of major interest. In the light of the increasing survival of patients
with primary, high-risk breast cancer because of adjuvant chemotherapy, the control of therapy-associated, potentially long-term, persisting, adverse effects is essential. Therefore, additional, welldesigned, prospective trials should be undertaken to study structural
and functional changes in the brain of breast cancer patients. These
investigations should focus on patients who are receiving standard
chemotherapy regimens. In addition, because of the increasing
number of patients undergoing dose-dense or dose-intense adjuvant
chemotherapies, these subgroups also should be evaluated systematically. Future directions should combine structural and functional
imaging of the brain as well as neuropsychological assessments in a
longitudinal trial, including baseline ﬁndings before the start of any
systemic therapy.

REFERENCES
1.

2.

3.

ª 2007 American Cancer Society

Inagaki M, Yoshikawa E, Matsuoka Y, et al. Smaller regional volumes of gray
and white matter demonstrated in breast cancer survivors exposed to adjuvant
chemotherapy. Cancer. 2007;109:146–156.
Castellon SA, Silverman DHS, Ganz PA. Breast cancer treatment and cognitive functioning: current status and future challenges in assessment. Breast
Cancer Res Treat. 2005;92:199–206.
Wefel JS, Lenzi R, Theriault R, Buzdar AU, Cruickshank S, Meyers CA. ‘Chemobrain’ in breast carcinoma? A prologue. Cancer. 2004;101:466–475.

Correspondence

Michael H. R. Eichbaum, MD
Andreas Schneeweiss, MD
Christof Sohn, MD
Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics
University of Heidelberg Medical School
Heidelberg, Germany
DOI 10.1002/cncr.22745
Published online 14 May 2007 in Wiley InterScience
(www.interscience.wiley.com).

Author Reply

W

e appreciate the comments of Dr. Eichbaum
et al. on our study. They have made some important points regarding the interpretation of the
observed ﬁndings.1
It is important to recognize that our study was
not of a longitudinal design with baseline ﬁndings
before the start of the patients’ adjuvant chemotherapy. In addition, several potential confounding factors, such as endocrine treatment, need to be
controlled in any future studies.
Regarding the clinical relevance of the results,
the regimens of adjuvant chemotherapies that were
used were not those that currently are recommended
as standard chemotherapies that contain anthracyclines. The breast cancer surgeries in these patients
were performed between 1992 and 2001. At that
time, anthracycline-containing regimes were not
standard. This circumstance may limit the clinical
relevance of the current ﬁndings.
Our study also did not elucidate the mechanisms
responsible for the effect on brain structure or on
brain and cognitive functions. Further studies in animal models and using functional neuroimaging techniques in humans are needed to elucidate these
mechanisms. Such elucidations would aid in the development of intervention strategies and new medications.

225

Management of the long-term, adverse effects of
potentially curative cancer treatments is of great importance for optimizing the quality of life of cancer survivors. Although several controversial ﬁndings
have been reported, many studies have demonstrated subjective and objective cognitive impairments in cancer patients receiving chemotherapy.2
In light of this situation, the results of the current
study should provide new insights for future research
aimed at improving the quality of life of cancer
patients.

REFERENCES
1.

2.

Inagaki M, Yoshikawa E, Matsuoka Y, et al. Smaller regional volumes of brain gray and white matter demonstrated in breast cancer survivors exposed to adjuvant
chemotherapy. Cancer. 2007;109:146–156.
Jansen CE, Miaskowski C, Dodd M, Dowling G, Kramer
J. A meta-analysis of studies of the effects of cancer chemotherapy on various domains of cognitive function. Cancer.
2005;104:2222–2233.

Masatoshi Inagaki MD, PhD
Research Center for Innovative Oncology
National Cancer Center Hospital East
Chiba, Japan
Center for Suicide Prevention
National Institute of Mental Health
National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry
Tokyo, Japan
Yosuke Uchitomi MD, PhD
Research Center for Innovative Oncology
National Cancer Center Hospital East
Chiba, Japan
Shigeru Imoto MD, PhD
Division of Breast Surgery
National Cancer Center Hospital East
Chiba, Japan
DOI 10.1002/cncr.22746
Published online 14 May 2007 in Wiley InterScience
(www.interscience.wiley.com).

