Commentary

Bypassing Phase 1 Trials in the Cancer Drug
Development Paradigm: Generally Unwise and
Potentially Dangerous
Maurie Markman, MD

The well-established standard approach to the development of systemic antineoplastic therapy begins with phase 1 trials,
when new agents or novel combination drug strategies are initially introduced into the clinical setting.1
Although the primary purpose of phase 1 trials is the determination of safety, these early clinical investigative efforts
are also associated with several important secondary endpoints that are essential to future drug development, including: 1)
carefully defining the overall toxicity profile and exploring strategies to mitigate serious side effects, 2) establishing both
the dose and schedule for subsequent studies, 3) understanding the agent’s pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic profile,
4) gaining preliminary evidence of efficacy, and 5) learning of the possible relations between proposed biomarkers and
response or toxicity. Depending on the specific circumstances, phase 1 trials will be followed by 1 or more phase 2 efficacy
and/or phase 3 randomized comparative studies.
Unfortunately, this observer has noted a recent trend in which some oncology investigators have suggested bypassing
formal phase 1 testing of presumably theoretically attractive new/novel antineoplastic drug combinations (cytotoxic and
noncytotoxic), with the initial evaluation of the regimen being undertaken in the phase 2, or even phase 3, setting.2 This
commentary was written to challenge the need for, and wisdom of, this approach and to highlight the potential danger to
research subjects participating in later stage trials that are not supported by rigorous phase 1 data.
What follows are several possible justifications for considering early phase studies unnecessary before embarking on
phase 2 to 3 efficacy trials, and a brief rebuttal to each suggested rationale for bypassing the conduct of well-designed and
conducted phase 1 trials.
The Toxicity of the Individual Drugs Is Well-Known and One Can ‘‘Anticipate’’ Their Toxicity
When They Are Used in Combination
It is not difficult to document the potential risk of the development of excessively serious side effects associated with new
antineoplastic drug combinations or single agents that were not predicted based on pre-existing clinical data.2-10 Furthermore, even if the side effect profile was anticipated, it is a highly questionable assertion that a study whose primary focus is
efficacy (phases 2 and 3 studies) will serve the equivalent role of defining an optimal dose, schedule, and drug modification
strategy as a trial whose specific focus is safety (phase 1 study). This particular point should be noted by all members of
Institutional Review Boards (IRBs) who are considering approval of a particular phase 2 or phase 3 trial in which 1 purpose of the study is to ‘‘collect the initial toxicity data for a regimen’’ in the current absence of such information. A specific
issue will be the adequacy of the informed consent process and the appropriateness of the document patients/prospective
research subjects are asked to read and sign that outlines the risks associated with participation in the ‘‘efficacy’’ trial. How
clearly is the lack of information on the safety of the drug regimen explained?
If Excessive Toxicity Is Noted in Phase 2 or Phase 3 Trials, the Study Can Simply Be Modified to
Use a Lower Dose of 1 or All Agents in a Drug Combination
Because the primary purpose of both phase 2 and phase 3 studies will be to determine efficacy, how will the results of such
studies be interpreted if the dose/schedule of a particular experimental regimen is required to be substantially modified
Corresponding author: Maurie Markman, MD, Department of Gynecologic Medical Oncology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1515
Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030; Fax: (713) 563-9586; mmarkman@mdanderson.org
Department of Gynecologic Medical Oncology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.25543, Received: May 3, 2010; Revised: June 15, 2010; Accepted: June 23, 2010, Published online July 21, 2010 in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com)

5116

Cancer

November 15, 2010

Bypassing Phase 1 Trials/Markman

during the conduct of the trial because of documentation
of excessive toxicity? Is the demonstrated efficacy because
of the ‘‘higher,’’ more toxic dose/schedule, or will a similar
outcome be observed with the ‘‘less’’ toxic strategy used at
a later point in the conduct of the trial? Will the investigators of a study that mandated changes in the dose/schedule because of excessive toxicity simply guess at the answer
to this question?
The First Group of Patients Participating in a
Phase 3 Trial Who Are Receiving the
‘‘Experimental’’ Regimen (the Dose,
Schedule, and Toxicity Profile Not Previously
Defined in a Phase 1 Trial) Can Be ‘‘Carefully
Watched’’ and If Excessive Toxicity Is
Observed, the Regimen Can Be Modified
In general, the conduct of phase 1 trials requires meticulous monitoring (blood work, patient visits) to ensure
patient safety and to be certain that serious but initially
more subtle side effects are not overlooked (eg, mild rash
in Course 1, but severe rash in Course 2). In fact, most
institutions involved in the conduct of phase 1 studies either perform such trials in special units or at least assign
patients to be very carefully (and frequently) observed by
highly experienced research nurses. In contrast, the conduct of later stage efficacy studies will generally require
less frequent patient visits and the research teams may not
be as knowledgeable of the requirements associated with
detailed evaluations of toxicity, or be appropriately staffed
to provide the monitoring or oversight essential to maximize current and future patient/research subject safety. Is
this the optimal, or even an acceptable, approach to ensuring safety in the setting of an initial evaluation of a novel
drug combination?
The Performance of Phase 1 Trials Adds
Precious Time to Antineoplastic Drug
Development and Will Delay the Initiation of
Definitive Phase 3 Studies
There is simply no inherent reason 1 or several welldesigned and well-conducted phase 1 trials should substantially delay the ultimate conduct of definitive phase 3
studies. In fact, a formal phase 1 trial can include as few as
4 to 6 patients safely treated at a specific dose and on a
schedule planned to be used in a future efficacy study. It is
only in the setting in which investigators prospectively
plan to increase/modify the dose to explore additional regimens or in which unanticipated excessive toxicity is documented and alternative strategies must be examined that a

Cancer

November 15, 2010

genuine ‘‘delay’’ may be added to the process. However,
in the first circumstance, the effort has been designed into
the program (often to define the ‘‘maximally tolerable
dose’’) and in the second, the changes are simply essential
to ensure patient safety.
There Are Currently Too Many Possible Drug
Combinations to Evaluate in the Phase 1
Setting. It Is Important to Simply Select a
Dose and Schedule and Observe for Toxicity
During the Conduct of the Phase 2 Efficacy
or Phase 3 Randomized Studies
Of course it is an accurate statement that there currently
exist a remarkably expanding number of possible drug
combinations using both standard cytotoxic agents and a
large variety of ‘‘targeted therapies’’ recently introduced
into the clinic. However, there is no requirement to test all
such combinations in the phase 1 setting. It is appropriate
for investigators to select particular combinations for examination in such studies based on either preclinical (eg, evidence of ‘‘synergy’’ observed in experimental model
systems) or existing clinical data (eg, known biological activity of the drugs delivered as single agents). It is these specific combinations that are most relevant to examine in the
phase 1 setting before embarking on efficacy trials.
A Phase 1 Study of a Particular Combination
Regimen Has Already Been Completed in a
‘‘Typical’’ Phase 1 Population, With the
Median Number of Cycles Delivered Per
Patient Being 1 (Range, 1-2)
The issue of the acceptability of existing phase 1 study
data is most relevant in the case of malignancies in which
it is realistically anticipated the patient population will
likely receive substantially more cycles of systemic antineoplastic therapy than in other types of cancer that are
routinely represented prominently in phase 1 trials (eg,
ovarian cancer vs cancers of the lung or pancreas). This
observation likely relates to both the inherent sensitivity
of these specific diseases to several antineoplastic strategies
and to the often relatively indolent (or ‘‘chronic’’) natural
history of the malignancy. The point to be made here is that
a clinically relevant side effect may simply not be noted (or
noted to be only a minor issue) after 1 or 2 delivered cycles
of a particular anticancer agent, but with higher cumulative
dosing (using the same dose and schedule), serious side
effects may be observed (eg, platinum-associated and paclitaxel-associated peripheral neuropathy; pegylated liposomal
doxorubicin-associated hand-foot syndrome).

5117

Commentary

For unquestionably valid reasons, phase 1 testing of
antineoplastic agents and combinations was introduced
decades ago into the standard drug development paradigm.1 In the absence of both clinically and ethically acceptable justifications to remove this critical and welldefined component designed to ensure the safety of
research subjects, it is difficult to understand the reasons
why this effective strategy should be bypassed.
Clearly stated, a desire to ‘‘speed up the process’’ is
an inadequate justification for increasing the risk of serious research-related morbidity. It is perhaps time for scientific review committees, IRBs, and regulatory agencies
to take a much closer look at proposed antineoplastic drug
efficacy studies to be certain that their conduct is based on
evidence of safety previously defined in appropriately
designed, conducted, and reported phase 1 trials.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The author made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. Sznol M.Drug development. In: Devita VT Jr, Lawrence
TS, Rosenberg SA, eds. Cancer: Principles and Practice of
Oncology. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins; 2008:385-401.
2. Kurtz JE, Hardy-Bessard AC, Deslandres M, et al. Cetuximab, topotecan and cisplatin for the treatment of advanced
cervical cancer: a phase II GINECO trial. Gynecol Oncol.
2009;113:16-20.

5118

3. Azad NS, Posadas EM, Kwitkowski VE, et al. Combination
targeted therapy with sorafenib and bevacizumab results in
enhanced toxicity and antitumor activity. J Clin Oncol.
2008;26:3709-3714.
4. Nimeiri HS, Oza AM, Morgan RJ, et al. Efficacy and safety
of bevacizumab plus erlotinib for patients with recurrent
ovarian, primary peritoneal, and fallopian tube cancer: a
trial of the Chicago, PMH, and California Phase II Consortia. Gynecol Oncol. 2008;110:49-55.
5. Connelly E, Markman M, Kennedy A, et al. Paclitaxel
delivered as a 3-hr infusion with cisplatin in patients with
gynecologic cancers: unexpected incidence of neurotoxicity.
Gynecol Oncol. 1996;62:166-168.
6. Vasey PA, Paul J, Birt A, et al. Docetaxel and cisplatin in
combination as first-line chemotherapy for advanced epithelial ovarian cancer. Scottish Gynaecological Cancer Trials
Group. J Clin Oncol. 1999;17:2069-2080.
7. Gianni L, Munzone E, Capri G, et al. Paclitaxel by 3-hour
infusion in combination with bolus doxorubicin in women
with untreated metastatic breast cancer: high antitumor efficacy and cardiac effects in a dose-finding and sequence-finding study. J Clin Oncol. 1995;13:2688-2699.
8. Rougier P, Bugat R, Douillard JY, et al. Phase II study of
irinotecan in the treatment of advanced colorectal cancer in
chemotherapy-naive patients and patients pretreated with
fluorouracil-based chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol. 1997;15:
251-260.
9. Pautier P, Joly F, Kerbrat P, et al. Phase II study of gefitinib in combination with paclitaxel (P) and carboplatin (C)
as second-line therapy for ovarian, tubal or peritoneal adenocarcinoma (1839IL/0074).Gynecol Oncol. 2010;116:157162.
10. Mackay HJ, Tinker A, Winquist E, et al. A phase II study
of sunitinib in patients with locally advanced or metastatic
cervical carcinoma: NCIC CTG Trial IND.184. Gynecol
Oncol. 2010;116:163-167.

Cancer

November 15, 2010

