Original Article

Quality of Life in Patients With K-RAS
Wild-Type Colorectal Cancer
The CO.20 Phase 3 Randomized Trial
Jolie Ringash, MD1; Heather-Jane Au, MD2; Lillian L. Siu, MD3; Jeremy D. Shapiro, MD4; Derek J. Jonker, MD5;
John R. Zalcberg, MD6; Malcolm J. Moore, MD7; Andrew Strickland, MD8; Rami Kotb, MD9; Mark Jeffery, MD10;
Thierry Alcindor, MD11; Siobhan Ng, MD12; Muhammad Salim, MD13; Sabe Sabesan, MD14; Jay C. Easaw, MD15;
Jenny Shannon, MD16; Fabyolla El-Tahche, PhD17; Ian Walters, MD18; Dongsheng Tu, PhD19;
Christopher J. O’Callaghan, DVM19; on behalf of the NCIC Clinical Trials Group and
the Australasian Gastrointestinal Trials Group

BACKGROUND: The CO.20 trial randomized patients with K-RAS wild-type, chemotherapy-refractory, metastatic colorectal cancer to
receive cetuximab (CET) plus brivanib alaninate (BRIV) or CET plus placebo (CET=placebo). METHODS: Quality of life (QoL) was
assessed using the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Quality of Life Questionnaire C30 at baseline and
at 2, 4, 6, 8, 12, 16, and 24 weeks until disease progression. Predefined coprimary QoL endpoints were time to deterioration (first worsening from baseline of  10 points) on the Physical Function (PF) and Global (GHS) scales. RESULTS: Of 750 randomized patients,
721 (358 of whom received CET=BRIV) were assessable for QoL. QoL compliance and baseline PF and GHS scores did not differ by
treatment arm. The median time to deterioration was 1.6 months versus 1.1 months for GHS (P 5.02) and 5.6 months versus 1.7 months
for PF (P <.0001) favoring CET=placebo. Secondary analysis favored CET=placebo for QOL response on the PF, Cognitive Function,
Fatigue, Nausea, Appetite, and Diarrhea scales. A greater percentage of patients on the CET=BRIV arm had PF worsening at 6 weeks
(31% vs 17%). Clinical adverse events of  grade 3 were more common with CET=BRIV than with CET=placebo, including fatigue (25%
vs 11%), hypertension, rash, diarrhea, abdominal pain, dehydration, and anorexia. CONCLUSIONS: Compared with CET=placebo, the
combination of CET=BRIV worsened time to QoL deterioration for patients with K-RAS wild-type, chemotherapy-refractory, metastatic colorectal cancer on the PF and GHS scales of European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Quality of Life
Questionnaire C30. This result may be due to higher rates of fatigue and gastrointestinal adverse events. Cancer 2014;120:181–9.
C 2013 American Cancer Society.
V
KEYWORDS: colorectal cancer, K-RAS, palliative chemotherapy, quality of life, questionnaires, patient-reported outcomes.

INTRODUCTION
Chemotherapy-refractory metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC) has a short median survival that is measured in
months. The goal of therapy is to maintain patient function and well-being for as long as possible, which implies
placing value jointly on survival and quality of life (QoL). New, targeted, biologic anticancer agents hold promise
for extending survival while maintaining or improving QoL, either by producing disease response and=or delaying
progression. The ideal agents in this setting are those that can be conveniently delivered by the oral route, and produce minimal toxicity.

Corresponding author: Jolie Ringash, MD, Department of Radiation Oncology, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, 5th Fl, 610 University Ave, Toronto, Ontario
M5G 2M9 Canada; Fax: (416) 946-6561; jolie.ringash@rmp.uhn.on.ca
1
Princess Margaret Cancer Centre and University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; 2Cross Cancer Institute, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada; 3Princess Margaret
Cancer Centre and University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; 4Cabrini Hospital and Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; 5The Ottawa Hospital
and the University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada; 6Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; 7Princess Margaret Cancer Centre and University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; 8Monash Medical Centre and Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; 9Sherbrooke University Medical Center, Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada; 10Christchurch Hospital, Christchurch, South Island, New Zealand; 11McGill University, Montreal
General Hospital, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; 12St John of God Hospital, Subiaco, Western Australia, Australia; 13Allan Blair Cancer Centre, Regina, Saskatchewan,
Canada; 14Townsville Hospital, Townsville, Queensland, Australia; 15Tom Baker Cancer Centre, Calgary, Alberta, Canada; 16Nepean Hospital, Sydney, New South
Wales, Australia; 17National Health and Medical Research Council Clinical Trials Centre, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia; 18Bristol-Myers
Squibb, Wallingford, Connecticut; 19NCIC Clinical Trials Group, Queen’s University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada

Presented in part at the 2012 American Society of Clinical Oncology Gastrointestinal Cancers Symposium; January 19-21, 2012; San Francisco, CA.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28410, Received: July 16, 2013; Revised: August 20, 2013; Accepted: August 28, 2013, Published online October 11, 2013 in Wiley Online
Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

January 15, 2014

181

Original Article

The NCIC Clinical Trials Group (NCIC CTG)
and the Australasian Gastrointestinal Trials Group
(AGITG) previously conducted a joint randomized
phase 3 trial (CO.17) that was not limited to patients
with K-RAS wild-type (WT) CRC and that demonstrated improvement in both survival and QoL with
treatment with cetuximab (CET) versus best supportive
care alone. Subset analysis confirmed even larger benefits in survival (median overall survival [OS], 9.5
months vs 4.8 months; progression-free survival [PFS]
hazards ratio [HR] of 0.4) and QoL (improvement in
Global Health Status [GHS] by 3.2 points vs worsening by 7.7 points, at 8 weeks) for patients with K-RAS
WT, chemotherapy-refractory, metastatic CRC who are
treated with cetuximab versus those who received best
supportive care alone.1 The mutational status of KRAS was found to have no prognostic effect in patients
receiving best support care alone, validating its role as
a predictive biomarker for antiepidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) antibody efficacy.2,3
CO.20 attempted to capitalize on the encouraging
antitumor activity of the combination of CET with the
dual-pathway blockade vascular endothelial growth factor=EGFR agent brivanib alaninate (BRIV). BRIV is
administered orally, and a previous phase 1 study demonstrated that it can be given together with CET at full
monotherapy doses for both agents, with acceptable toxicity.4 In a subgroup of 15 patients with K-RAS WT disease
and no prior exposure to anti-EGFR therapy, the median
duration of PFS was 10.9 months.5 By randomizing
between CET monotherapy (with placebo; CET=placebo) and its combination with BRIV (CET=BRIV), we
hoped to note an improvement in OS. QoL was measured
as a secondary outcome. Because maintenance of QoL,
rather than its improvement, was the most realistic goal in
this population of patients with advanced disease, we
defined our primary QoL endpoint a priori as time to
clinically meaningful deterioration in QoL scores.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
CO.20 was an international, multicenter, randomized
controlled, phase 3 study designed by a protocol committee that included members of NCIC CTG and the
AGITG. The NCIC CTG collected, managed, analyzed, and had full unrestricted rights to publication of
the study data. The relevant Institutional Review
Boards approved the protocol, and all participants provided written informed consent. Details of patient eligibility, randomization, and treatment have been
previously published.6
182

Key eligibility criteria included K-RAS WT status
(as amended); an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group
(ECOG) performance status (PS) of 0 to 2; and contraindications to, or lack of response with, fluoropyrimidine
agents (irinotecan and oxaliplatin). Randomization used a
minimization method and was stratified by treatment center and ECOG PS.7 Patients as well as clinical and
research staff were blinded to treatment arm assignment.
Patients in both treatment arms received CET (loading
dose of 400 mg=m2 intravenously over 120 minutes;
weekly maintenance infusion of 250 mg=m2 over 60
minutes). Patients randomized to combined therapy also
received oral BRIV at a dose of 800 mg daily, whereas
others received matching oral placebo.
Assessments

QoL was an integral trial component; all study patients
able to understand English or French were expected to
complete questionnaires. The European Organization for
Research and Treatment of Cancer Quality of Life Questionnaire C30 (EORTC QLQ-C30) is the most frequently used self-administered, cancer-specific QoL
questionnaire.8 It has demonstrated validity and reliability
in patients with advanced cancer9 and has been shown to
be responsive to the effects of chemotherapy in patients
with CRC.10 This instrument has 30 items with 5 functional scales (Physical, Role, Cognitive, Emotional, and
Social), a GHS scale, 3 symptom scales (Fatigue, Pain,
and Nausea and Vomiting) and 6 single items (Dyspnea,
Sleep Disturbance, Appetite Loss, Constipation, Diarrhea,
and Financial Impact).11 According to the scoring manual, missing items were handled as recommended and linear transformation was used to standardize raw scores to a
range of 0 to 100, with higher scores indicating better
QoL on functional scales and more symptoms on symptom scales.12 Previous research has suggested that a change
in scores of  10 points represents a moderate change that
is likely to be noticed by, and meaningful to, patients.13,14
All patients were assessed by physical examination
every 4 weeks. Telephone monitoring was conducted
until death for those patients unable to attend the clinic.
The EORTC QLQ-C30 was administered by the research
associate in outpatient clinics before patients were assessed
by the physician or by telephone if the patient was unable
to come to the clinic at 2, 4, 6, 8, 12, 16, and 24 weeks
from randomization, until disease progression or clinical
deterioration (to an ECOG PS of 4, or when hospitalization was required for end-of-life care). For patients who
developed disease progression before 12 weeks, QoL
assessment was terminated at 12 weeks.
Cancer

January 15, 2014

CRC QOL With Brivanib and Cetuximab/Ringash et al

Statistical Analysis

Final analysis of the current study for the primary endpoint, OS, was conducted on March 1, 2011 when the
protocol-specified 536 deaths were observed. The QoL
analysis was also performed at this time.
QoL was a secondary endpoint of the overall study.
The primary QoL hypothesis was that the combined treatment (CET=BRIV) would delay deterioration in QoL
scores; specifically, the time to deterioration by  10
points on the Physical Function (PF) and GHS scales of
the EORTC QLQ-C30 would be longer in this arm compared with the CET=placebo arm. PF and GHS were chosen as the scales most likely to be sensitive to the effects of
chemotherapy and to best reflect the global QoL experience. The previous CO.17 study had demonstrated a median time to disease progression on PF of 5.7 months in
patients with K-RAS WT CRC who were treated with
CET, and therefore assessment up until 24 weeks was
judged to be sufficient. Time windows for accepted QoL
assessments were defined as 6 1 week of the designated
date up until 8 weeks, then 6 2 weeks to 16 weeks, and
then 6 4 weeks thereafter. All randomly assigned patients
with a baseline and at least 1 other QoL assessment were
analyzed. At the time of study design, it was not routine to
calculate a priori power for secondary endpoints. The
Hochberg method was used to adjust for 2 comparisons
in the primary QoL analysis.15 For all scales, the median
scores, change scores, and QoL response (percentage of
patients with changes of  10 points) by study arm were
assessed as secondary outcomes, without adjustment for
multiple endpoints. Missing data within questionnaires
were handled according to EORTC guidelines; we performed an available case analysis, including all patients
with a baseline and at least 1 follow-up QoL assessment.
In addition, safety profiles of CET and BRIV were
assessed according to the National Cancer Institute Common Toxicity Criteria (version 3.0).
All patients who underwent randomization were
included in the efficacy=QoL analyses on the basis of the
group to which they were assigned. Safety analysis was
conducted on an on-treatment basis, omitting those
patients who withdrew consent before any intervention.
Discrete variables were compared with the use of the
Fisher exact test, and continuous and ordinal categorical
variables were compared using the Wilcoxon test.
RESULTS
Patient inclusions have been previously published in a
Consolidated Standards Of Reporting Trials (CONSORT) diagram.6 Of 750 patients who were randomized,
Cancer

January 15, 2014

376 were randomized to the CET=BRIV treatment arm
and 374 were randomized to the CET=placebo treatment
arm. Of these, 5 patients (4 on the CET=BRIV arm and 1
on the CET=placebo arm) never received any treatment,
leaving 745 patients (372 on the CET=BRIV arm and
373 on the CET=placebo arm) available for safety analyses. Patients in both treatment arms were similar with
respect to baseline characteristics (data not shown). The
majority of patients had an ECOG PS of 1 with a median
of 3 sites of disease, most commonly including the liver
and=or lung. On average, these patients were 31 months
past their cancer diagnosis at the time of randomization
and had received > 3 lines of prior chemotherapy;
approximately one-third had received radiotherapy. The
median duration of follow-up was 18.7 months (range,
0.1 months-34.1 months).
Survival Outcomes

No statistically significant difference in OS was observed.
The median OS was 8.8 months (95% confidence interval
[95% CI], 7.6 months-9.6 months) with the CET=BRIV
combination versus 8.1 months (95% CI, 7.4 months-9.0
months) with CET/placebo, resulting in an HR of 0.88
(95% CI, 0.74-1.03; 2-sided P 5 0.12).
PFS was superior with the CET=BRIV combination
(HR for disease progression or death, 0.72; 95% CI,
0.62-0.84 [2-sided P < .0001]), with a median PFS of 5.0
months (95% CI, 3.7 months-5.4 months) versus 3.4
months (95% CI, 2.8 months-3.6 months) with
CET=placebo.
QoL Compliance

Compliance with QoL assessment was calculated as the
number of patients who completed a questionnaire at a
given time point divided by the number known to be alive
at that time (Table 1). These figures may underestimate
true compliance, because the denominator did not
exclude those patients who developed disease progression
before 12 weeks or those who later developed disease progression or deteriorated clinically, although these patients
were not expected to complete subsequent questionnaires.16 Overall compliance rates did not differ by treatment arm; in weeks 2 to 8 there was a trend toward a
slightly higher compliance in the CET=placebo arm,
whereas at 24 weeks there was a similar trend favoring the
CET=BRIV arm. Compliance rates were high at baseline
and in early follow-up but declined after 4 weeks, similar
to the rates seen in the CET arm of the previous CO.17
trial comparing CET alone with best supportive care in a
similar population.
183

Original Article
TABLE 1. Compliance With EORTC QLQ-C30 Over
Time by Study Arm
Compliance by Treatment Arm, %
Time Point, Weeks

CET/BRIV

CET/Placebo

95
80
80
71
69
72
68
59

97
87
85
78
77
69
62
47

Baseline
2
4
6
8
12
16
24

Abbreviations: CET/BRIV, cetuximab plus brivanib alaninate; CET/placebo,
cetuximab plus placebo; EORTC QLQ-C30, European Organization for
Research and Treatment of Cancer Quality of Life Questionnaire C30.

Figure 1. Mean health-related quality of life scores are shown
at baseline. CET=BRIV indicates cetuximab plus brivanib alaninate; CET=P, cetuximab plus placebo.

Figure 2. Time to definitive deterioration is shown for the
(Top) Global quality of life (QoL) and (Bottom) Physical
Function scales of the European Organization for Research
and Treatment of Cancer Quality of Life Questionnaire C30.
NCIC.

Baseline QOL Scores

Baseline scores did not differ by study arm (Fig. 1).
Patients demonstrated significant impairment in GHS,
with scores of 63 and 64.4, respectively, in the CET=BRIV and CET=placebo arms; PF scores were 77 and 80,
respectively. The highest burden of baseline symptoms
was seen on the Fatigue scale (35 and 34, respectively).
Primary QoL Analysis: Time to Deterioration of
QoL Scores

Time to definitive deterioration (a reduction in scale
scores by  10 points) is shown in Figure 2 for the GHS
scale (Fig. 2 Top) and the PF scale (Fig. 2 Bottom). The
median time to definitive deterioration was significantly
shorter with CET=BRIV versus CET=placebo on both
scales (1.7 months [95% CI, 1.5 months-2.6 months] versus 5.6 months (95% CI, 3.5 months to not estimable]
184

for PF [P < .0001] and 1.1 months [95% CI, 1 month1.5 months] versus 1.6 months [95% CI, 1.3 months-2
months] for GHS [P 5 .02].
Secondary QoL Analysis: Change Scores

Change from baseline was calculated for all scales at all
time points. All differences between treatment arms indicated better QoL with CET=placebo versus CET=BRIV.
Differences between treatment arms associated with a P
value of < .05 (without adjustment for multiple comparisons) were noted with regard to PF changes at all time
points and on GHS changes at 2, 4, 8, 12, and 16 weeks;
changes in Role and Cognitive and Social Functioning
scales differed at 2, 4, and 8 weeks; Role and Social Functioning scale changes differed at 6 weeks; and only Social
Cancer

January 15, 2014

CRC QOL With Brivanib and Cetuximab/Ringash et al

Functioning scale changes differed at 16 weeks. Symptom
scales demonstrated a greater increase (worsening) in
Appetite and Diarrhea from baseline with the dual-drug
regimen at all time points, with a greater increase in Fatigue at all time points except 24 months. Dyspnea and
pain were both increased by a greater amount in the
CET=BRIV treatment arm at week 2 and Dyspnea was
also increased by a greater amount at weeks 4 and 8.
Secondary QoL Analysis: QoL Response

Patients were classified as “improved” if at any time they
reported a score that was  10 points better than baseline.
Those who did not improve were classified as having
“worsened” if at any time they reported a score  10
points worse than baseline. Other patients were
considered “stable.” Results for all scales are shown in Figure 3 and Table 2. All observed differences between treatment arms showed a smaller percentage of patients with
worsening QoL in the CET=placebo arm compared with
the CET=BRIV arm. Statistically significant differences
between the treatment arms were observed for the PF,
Cognitive Functioning, Fatigue, Nausea and Vomiting,
Appetite, and Diarrhea scales.
We also specifically examined the percentage of
patients who demonstrated deterioration on PF and GHS
at the prespecified 6-week and 8-week time points. At
both times, a higher percentage of patients on the CET=BRIV arm demonstrated PF deterioration (31% at 6
weeks and 30% at 8 weeks vs 17% and 20%, respectively,
for CET=placebo). Differences between treatment arms
with regard to the percentage of patients with GHS deterioration were not found to be statistically significant at either time point.

Figure 3. Quality of life (QoL) response assessment is shown
among the percentages of patients with improved, stable,
and worsened QoL over time by treatment arm with regard
to (Top) Function domains and Global QoL scales and (Bottom) Symptom domains and single items. CET=BRIV indicates
cetuximab plus brivanib alaninate; CET=P, cetuximab plus
placebo.

Clinician-Reported Adverse Events

Clinician-reported adverse events of interest or with an
incidence of at least 5% at  grade 3 have been reported
in detail elsewhere6; however, we summarize them here
for comparison with patient-reported QoL data. The
addition of BRIV to CET led to a statistically significantly
higher incidence of  grade 3 nonhematologic adverse
events (78% vs 53% with CET=placebo), especially with
regard to fatigue, hypertension, rash, and gastrointestinal
toxicities including abdominal pain, diarrhea, dehydration, and anorexia (P < .05). In general, much higher rates
of certain adverse events were reported by patients than
were captured by adverse event reporting; for example,
> grade 3 fatigue by treatment arm (CET=BRIV vs
CET=placebo) was 25% versus 11%, dyspnea was 8%
versus 5%, diarrhea was 7% versus 3%,and anorexia was
Cancer

January 15, 2014

5% versus 1%, whereas worsening Fatigue, Dyspnea, Diarrhea, and Anorexia (without grading) was reported by
approximately 30% to 60% of patients on the EORTC
QLQ-C30 (Table 2).
DISCUSSION
Inclusion of the patient perspective in new drug development has recently been emphasized.17 Given that the primary endpoint of OS was not met in this multicenter,
randomized controlled phase 3 study comparing CET=BRIV with CET=placebo in patients with K-RAS WT,
chemotherapy-refractory, metastatic CRC, QoL outcomes are critical to the interpretation of whether combination therapy is beneficial from a patient perspective. A
statistically significant prolongation of PFS in the setting
185

Original Article
TABLE 2. QOL Response Assessment: Percentage of Patients With Improved, Stable, and Worsened QOL
Over Time by Study Arm
CET/BRIV, %

CET/Placebo, %

Scale

Improved

Stable

Worsened

Improved

Stable

Worsened

P

Physical
Role
Emotional
Cognitive
Social
Global
Pain
Fatigue
Nausea
Dyspnea
Sleep
Appetite
Constipation
Diarrhea
Financial

25
34
33
35
41
29
50
42
22
29
36
23
31
19
22

24
15
34
25
17
17
12
4
31
31
24
19
41
28
57

51
52
33
39
42
54
39
54
47
39
40
58
28
52
21

28
39
33
33
47
37
48
52
21
32
33
29
26
24
20

34
17
32
37
18
14
18
6
43
36
27
36
48
47
61

39
44
35
30
35
49
34
42
36
32
40
34
26
29
18

.002
.14
.88
.003
.15
.06
.07
.007
.004
.15
.63
<.0001
.13
<.0001
.51

Abbreviations: CET/BRIV, cetuximab plus brivanib alaninate; CET/placebo, cetuximab plus placebo; QOL, quality of life.

of improved or maintained QoL could translate into a
meaningful patient benefit. However, in the current
study, the observation that BRIV delayed disease progression was not found to be associated with a longer period
of time before deterioration in QoL. In fact, the combination of 2 drugs over single-agent CET led to an accelerated deterioration of QoL. This may have occurred due to
the increased toxicity of combined therapy with CET=BRIV, with side effects offsetting any potential QoL benefit of delayed disease progression.
The adverse events observed with the 2-drug combination suggested an additive, rather than multiplicative, effect. The types of adverse events observed in the
current study were consistent with observations in studies of each agent individually. However, coadministration of both agents led to a higher overall incidence of
significant toxicities ( grade 3), including fatigue,
hypertension, rash, and gastrointestinal upset (diarrhea,
abdominal pain, dehydration, and anorexia). EORTC
QLQ-C30 symptom scales indicated worsening of these
symptoms over time to a clinically significant degree in
a fairly high percentage of patients on both study arms,
as may be expected for patients in their last months of
life. However, deterioration was noted in more patients
on the combined therapy arm (54% vs 42% for Fatigue,
58% vs 34% for Appetite, 52% vs 29% for Diarrhea,
and 47% vs 36% for Nausea and Vomiting). In addition, the patient-reported QOL results further demonstrated a greater deterioration in the Cognitive, Role,
and Social Functioning domains, which are perhaps less
evident to clinician raters.
186

The primary QoL endpoint of the current study was
time to deterioration of QoL on the PF and GHS scales.
These scales do not query fatigue and gastrointestinal
symptoms directly, but by asking patients about their
capacity for exercise and daily activities (PF) and about
their overall health and QoL (GHS), they are likely to be
influenced by symptoms, particularly those that persist on
a daily basis. We hypothesize that the increased number of
adverse events and reported symptoms observed with the
2-drug combination could account for the more rapid
deterioration of these QoL outcomes.
Missing data are an inevitable problem in studies of
QoL in symptomatic patients with advanced cancer. As
demonstrated by the observed QoL results, patients with
advanced CRC who are undergoing chemotherapy experience significant fatigue and other symptoms that may lead
to reluctance to complete QoL assessments as time goes
on. We observed high compliance rates at baseline and up
until 4 weeks, followed by a decline into the 70% range
up until 12 weeks, with rates continuing to fall to 50% to
60% by 24 weeks. This pattern was noted in both treatment arms, and overall the compliance in the current
study was found to be very similar to what was observed in
the CET arm of the CO.17 trial (and superior to compliance in the best supportive care arm in the CO.17 trial).
Compliance rates would be expected to fall after 12 weeks
as patients who became “QoL ineligible” (due to progression of disease, decline to an ECOG PS of 4, or hospitalization for end-of-life care) were still included in the
denominator; only patients who died were excluded.
Thus, we believe the results presented herein can
Cancer

January 15, 2014

CRC QOL With Brivanib and Cetuximab/Ringash et al

TABLE 3. Committee Members, Site Investigators, Data Managers, and Key Trial Staff Who Participated in
the CO.20 Study from the NCIC Clinical Trials Group and the AGITG
NCIC Clinical Trials Group
Site Name
Prince Edward Island Cancer Treatment Centre, Queen Elizabeth Hospital
Atlantic Health Sciences Corporation
The Moncton Hospital
The Vitalite Health Network-Dr. Leon Richard
Centre Hopitalier Universitaire de Sherbrooke
CHA Hopital Enfant-Jesus
McGill University, Department of Oncology
Hopital du Sacre-Coeur de Montreal
HCLM Hopital Charles Lemoyne
Cancer Centre of Southeastern Ontario at Kingston
Niagara Health System
Juravinski Cancer Centre at Hamilton Health Sciences
Lakeridge Health Oshawa, Durham Regional Cancer Centre
Stronach Regional Health Centre at Southlake
Toronto East General Hospital
Odette Cancer Centre
The Royal Victoria Hospital
St. Michael’s Hospital
The Credit Valley Hospital
Grand River Regional Cancer Centre
London Regional Cancer Program
Regional Cancer Program of the Hopital Regional
Algoma District Cancer Program
Thunder Bay Regional Health Science Centre
CancerCare Manitoba, St. Boniface General Hospital
Allan Blair Cancer Centre
Saskatoon Cancer Centre
Tom Baker Cancer Centre
British Columbia Cancer Agency-Vancouver Cancer Centre
British Columbia Cancer Agency-Fraser Valley Cancer Centre
British Columbia Cancer Agency-Cancer Centre for the Southern Interior
British Columbia Cancer Agency-Abbotsford Centre

Principal Investigator

Philip Champion
Margot Burnell
Asif Shaikh
Pierre Whitlock
Rami R. Kotb
Catherine Doyle
Thierry Alcindor
Bernard Lesperance
Benoit Samson
Anna Tomiak
Brian Findlay
Elaine McWhirter
Rafal Wierzbicki
Peter James Anglin
Richard H-F Shao
Yoo-Joung Ko
Robert El-Maraghi
Christine Brezden-Masley
Sudha Rajagopal
Gregory J. Knight
Mary J. MacKenzie
Jonathan Noble
Silvana Spadafora
Dorie-Anna Dueck
Ralph P.W. Wong
Muhammad Salim
Kamal Haider
Jacob Easaw
Hagen Kennecke
Balvindar S. Johal
Sanjay Chandar Rao
Muhammad Zulfiqar

AGITG

Principal Investigator

Site Name
The Tweed Hospital
Tamworth Hospital
Bankstown/Lidcombe
Port Macquarie Base Hospital
Calvary Mater Newcastle and Lingard Private Hospital/Newcastle Private Hospital
Lismore Base Hospital
Coffs Harbour Health
Geelong Hospital
St Vincent’s Hospital
Ballarat Base Hospital
Sunshine Coast Cancer Service
Royal Perth Hospital
Palmerston North Hospital
Frankston Hospital and Peninsula Oncology Centre
Prince of Wales Hospital
Royal Prince Alfred Hospital
Dunedin Hospital
Christchurch Hospital
Princess Alexandra Hospital
Royal Darwin
Waikato Hospital
Sydney Haematology And Oncology Clinics
Liverpool Hospital
St John of God-Subiaco
Wellington Hospital
Royal North Shore Hospital
Townsville Hospital
Nepean Cancer Care Centre

Ehtesham Adbi
Stephen Ackland
Ray Asghari
Stephen Begbie
Tony Bonaventura
Adam Boyce
Karen Briscoe
Adam Broad
Ivon Burns
Geoff Chong
Michelle Cronk
Thomas Ferguson
Garry Forgeson
Vinod Ganju
David Goldstein
Lisa Horvath
Christopher Jackson
Mark Jeffery
Warren Joubert
Narayan Karanth
Ian Kennedy
Gavin Marx
Weng Ng
Siobhan Ng
Anne O’Donnell
Nick Pavlakis
Sabe Sabesan
Jenny Shannon

Cancer

January 15, 2014

187

Original Article
TABLE 3. Continued
AGITG

Principal Investigator

North West Regional
Royal Adelaide Hospital
Monash Medical Centre
Border Medical Oncology

Sheryl Sim
Nimit Singhal
Andrew Strickland
Craig Underhill

Royal Brisbane Hospital
NCIC Clinical Trials Group Central Office Staff

David Wyld
Australian NHMRC Clinical Trials Centre Staff

Jon Ottaway
Patrick Smith
Gail McDonald
Barbara Graham
Chad Winch
Louise Telford
Nicole Taylor
Julia Baran
Vicki Classen
Jane Cribb
Steve Hunt
David Gerryts
Lam Pho
Liting Zhu
Lei Han
Adam Lewis
Trevor Beimers
Terry Donnelly
Shawn Smith
Mike Broekhoven
Michelle Savoie
Rob Whelan
Alison Urton
Dora Nomikos
Shakeel Virk
Lyne O’Connor
Tara Arms
Lisa Goddard

Amy Boland
Lesley Brassel
Fabyolla El-Tahche
Reena Gill
Wendy Hague
Danielle Miller
Sophie Quiene
Burcu Vachan
Nicole Wong

Abbreviations: AGITG, Australasian Gastrointestinal Trials Group; NHMRC, National Health and Medical Research Council.

reasonably be generalized to patients with K-RAS WT,
chemotherapy-refractory, metastatic CRC who are considering receiving CET with or without BRIV as palliative
therapy.
In summary, the QoL experience of patients with
advanced, K-RAS WT, chemotherapy-refractory CRC
who are treated with concurrent CET=BRIV was found
on multiple analyses to be inferior to that of similar
patients who received CET=placebo. Although BRIV was
found to significantly delay disease progression, this benefit led to neither an improvement in OS nor patient QoL
(indeed, QoL deteriorated more quickly). If better supportive care could be developed to ameliorate the toxicities of the combination of CET=BRIV, then it is possible
that the demonstrated disease effectiveness could benefit
patients. In addition to confirming the patient QoL experience with CET, as previously published in the CO.17
trial, the results of the current study demonstrate the
188

importance of examining patients’ experiences during the
development of new palliative chemotherapy regimens. In
the current study, contrary to hypothesis, the addition of a
second drug did not improve patient QoL experience; in
fact, a disadvantage in terms of QoL was noted with the
addition of BRIV to CET.
Table 3 shows the committee members, site investigators, data managers, and key trial staff that participated
in the CO.20 study from the NCIC Clinical Trials Group
and the AGITG.
FUNDING SUPPORT
Supported by the Canadian Cancer Society Research Institute
(grant number 021039) and Bristol-Myers Squibb.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
Drs. Siu, Shapiro, and Zalcberg have received research funding
from Bristol-Myers Squibb. Dr. Shapiro and Dr. Zalcberg have

Cancer

January 15, 2014

CRC QOL With Brivanib and Cetuximab/Ringash et al

acted as consultants or in an advisory role for Merck Serono Australia. Dr. Zalcberg has research funding and travel support from
Bayer and Merck Serono. Dr. Alcindor has received honoraria from
GlaxoSmithKline and Amgen; consulting fees from Roche Canada,
Bristol-Myers Squibb, Amgen, and Merck; and research funding
and consulting fees from Sanofi-Aventis. Dr. Walters has a compensated employment relationship with Bristol-Myers Squibb as
the Executive Director and has stock or other ownership interests in
the same company. Drs. O’Callaghan and Tu are employees of the
NCIC Clinical Trials Group, which has received grant support
from Bristol-Myers Squibb.

7.
8.

9.
10.

REFERENCES
1. Au HJ, Karapetis CS, O’Callaghan CJ, et al. Health-related quality
of life in patients with advanced colorectal cancer treated with cetuximab: overall and KRAS-specific results of the NCIC CTG and
AGITG CO.17 Trial. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27:1822-1828.
2. Karapetis CS, Khambata-Ford S, Jonker DJ, et al. K-ras mutations
and benefit from cetuximab in advanced colorectal cancer. N Engl J
Med. 2008;359:1757-1765.
3. Jonker DJ, O’Callaghan CJ, Karapetis CS, et al. Cetuximab for the
treatment of colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2007;357:2040-2048.
4. Garrett CR, Siu LL, El-Khoueiry A, et al. Phase I dose-escalation
study to determine the safety, pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of brivanib alaninate in combination with full-dose cetuximab in patients with advanced gastrointestinal malignancies who
have failed prior therapy. Br J Cancer. 2011;105:44-52.
5. Ayers M, Awad M, Malone D, et al.Correlation between k-ras status
and efficacy results from a phase I=II study of brivanib alaninate in
combination with cetuximab in patients (pts) with advanced or metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC). Presented at the 2009 American Society of Clinical Oncology Gastrointestinal Cancers Symposium;
January 15–17, 2009; San Francisco, CA.
6. Siu LL, Shapiro JD, Jonker DJ, et al. Phase III randomized,
placebo-controlled study of cetuximab plus brivanib alaninate versus
cetuximab plus placebo in patients with metastatic, chemotherapy-

Cancer

January 15, 2014

11.

12.

13.

14.
15.
16.
17.

refractory, wild-type K-RAS colorectal carcinoma: the NCIC Clinical
Trials Group and AGITG CO.20 Trial. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31:
2477-2484.
Tu D. Minimization procedure. In: Chow S-C, ed. Encyclopedia of
Biopharmaceutical Statistics. New York: Marcel Dekker; 2003:614618.
Luckett T, King MT, Butow PN, et al. Choosing between the
EORTC QLQ-C30 and FACT-G for measuring health-related quality of life in cancer clinical research: issues, evidence and recommendations. Ann Oncol. 2011;22:2179-2190.
McDowell I, Newell C. Measuring Health: A Guide to Rating Scales
and Questionnaires. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press;
1996.
Uwer L, Rotonda C, Guillemin F, et al. Responsiveness of EORTC
QLQ-C30, QLQ-CR38 and FACT-C quality of life questionnaires
in patients with colorectal cancer. Health Qual Life Outcomes. 2011;
9:70.
Aaronson NK, Ahmedzai S, Bergman B, et al. The European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer QLQ-C30: a
quality-of-life instrument for use in international clinical trials in oncology. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1993;85:365-376.
Fayers P, Aaonson N, Bjordal K, Curran D, Groenvold M, on
behalf of the EORTC Quality of Life Study Group. EORTC QLQC30 Scoring Manual. 2nd ed. Brussels, Belgium: EORTC Quality
of Life Study Group; 1999.
Maringwa JT, Quinten C, King M, et al. Minimal important differences for interpreting health-related quality of life scores from the
EORTC QLQ-C30 in lung cancer patients participating in randomized controlled trials. Support Care Cancer. 2011;19:1753-1760.
Osoba D, Rodrigues G, Myles J, Zee B, Pater J. Interpreting the significance of changes in health-related quality-of-life scores. J Clin
Oncol. 1998;16:139-144.
Hochberg Y. A sharper Bonferroni procedure for multiple tests of
significance. Biometrika. 1998;75:800-802.
Osoba D, Zee B. Completion rates in health-related quality-of-life
assessment: approach of the National Cancer Institute of Canada
Clinical Trials Group. Stat Med. 1998;17:603-612.
Basch E. Toward patient-centered drug development in oncology. N
Engl J Med. 2013;369:397-400.

189

