HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.
Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2016 July 28; 166(3): 555–566. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.07.002.

Mitochondria and Cancer
Sejal Vyas, Elma Zaganjor, and Marcia C. Haigis*
Department of Cell Biology, Ludwig Center at Harvard, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02115

Abstract
Author Manuscript

Mitochondria are bioenergetic, biosynthetic and signaling organelles that are integral in stress
sensing to allow for cellular adaptation to the environment. Therefore, it is not surprising that
mitochondria are important mediators of tumorigenesis, as this process requires flexibility to adapt
to cellular and environmental alterations in addition to cancer treatments. Multiple aspects of
mitochondrial biology beyond bioenergetics support transformation including mitochondrial
biogenesis and turnover, fission and fusion dynamics, cell death susceptibility, oxidative stress
regulation, metabolism, and signaling. Thus, understanding mechanisms of mitochondrial
misregulation during tumorigenesis will be critical for the next generation of cancer therapeutics.

Introduction
Historical Perspective

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Louis Pasteur identified the importance of oxygen consumption in 1861, finding that yeast
divided more in the presence of oxygen and that oxygen inhibited fermentation, an
observation known as the ‘Pasteur effect’. The discovery of mitochondria in the 1890s,
described cytologically by both Richard Altmann and Carl Benda, began to shed light on
this observation, and in 1913 the biochemist Otto Warburg linked cellular respiration to
grana derived from guinea pig liver extracts (Ernster and Schatz, 1981). Warburg stated that
the granules functioned to enhance the activity of iron-containing enzymes and involved a
transfer to oxygen (Ernster and Schatz, 1981). In the following decades, many scientists
elucidated the machinery that drives mitochondrial respiration, including tricarboxylic acid
(TCA) cycle and fatty acid β-oxidation enzymes in the mitochondrial matrix that generate
electron donors to fuel respiration, and electron transport chain (ETC) complexes and ATP
synthase in the inner mitochondrial membrane (IMM) that carry out oxidative
phosphorylation (Ernster and Schatz, 1981). This biochemical understanding of
mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation gave mechanistic insight into the Pasteur effect,
which could be reconstituted by adding purified, respiring liver mitochondria to glycolytic
tumor supernatants and observing inhibited fermentation (Aisenberg et al., 1957). The

*

Corresponding author: marcia_haigis@hms.harvard.edu.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Vyas et al.

Page 2

Author Manuscript

ability of mitochondria to inhibit a glycolytic system suggested an active and direct role for
mitochondria in regulating oxidative versus glycolytic metabolism (Aisenberg et al., 1957).

Author Manuscript

Warburg’s seminal discovery that cancer cells undergo aerobic glycolysis, which refers to
the fermentation of glucose to lactate in the presence of oxygen as opposed to the complete
oxidation of glucose to fuel mitochondrial respiration, brought attention to the role of
mitochondria in tumorigenesis (Warburg, 1956). While the ‘Warburg effect’ is an undisputed
feature of many (but not all) cancer cells, Warburg’s reasoning that it stemmed from
damaged mitochondrial respiration caused immediate controversy (Weinhouse, 1956). We
now understand that while damaged mitochondria drive the Warburg effect in some cases,
many cancer cells that display Warburg metabolism possess intact mitochondrial respiration
with some cancer subtypes actually depending on mitochondrial respiration. Decades of
studies on mitochondrial respiration in cancer have set the framework for a new frontier
focused on additional functions of mitochondria in cancer, which have identified pleiotropic
roles of mitochondria in tumorigenesis.
A major function of mitochondria is ATP production, hence its nickname ‘powerhouse of the
cell’. However, mitochondria perform many roles beyond energy production, including the
generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), redox molecules and metabolites, regulation of
cell signaling and cell death and biosynthetic metabolism. These multifaceted functions of
mitochondria in normal physiology make them important cellular stress sensors, and allow
for cellular adaptation to the environment. Mitochondria similarly impart considerable
flexibility for tumor cell growth and survival in otherwise harsh environments such as during
nutrient depletion, hypoxia and cancer treatments, and are therefore key players in
tumorigenesis.

Author Manuscript

There is no simple canon for the role of mitochondria in cancer development. Instead the
mitochondrial function in cancers varies depending upon genetic, environmental and tissueof-origin differences between tumors. It is clear that the biology of mitochondria in cancer is
central to our understanding of cancer biology, as many classical cancer hallmarks result in
altered mitochondrial function. This review will summarize functions of mitochondria
biology that contribute to tumorigenesis, which include mitochondrial biogenesis and
turnover, fission and fusion dynamics, cell death, oxidative stress, metabolism and
bioenergetics, signaling and mitochondrial DNA (Figures 1 and 2).

Mitochondrial Biogenesis and Turnover

Author Manuscript

Mitochondrial mass is dictated by two opposing pathways, biogenesis and turnover, and has
emerged as both a positive and negative regulator of tumorigenesis. The role of
mitochondrial biogenesis in cancer is dictated by many factors, including metabolic state,
tumor heterogeneity, tissue type, microenvironment and tumor stage. Additionally,
mitophagy, the selective autophagic pathway for mitochondrial turnover, maintains a healthy
mitochondrial population. Importantly, misregulation of both mitochondrial biogenesis and
mitophagy are central to key oncogenic signaling pathways.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Vyas et al.

Page 3

Transcriptional and signaling networks regulating biogenesis

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Mitochondrial biogenesis is regulated by transcriptional programs that coordinate induction
of both mitochondrial and nuclear localized genes that encode mitochondrial proteins. The
transcriptional coactivator peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1
alpha (PGC-1α) is a central regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis through interactions with
multiple transcription factors (Tan et al., 2016). PGC-1α levels often reveal tumor reliance
on mitochondrial mass, with high PGC-1α expression resulting in a dependence on
mitochondrial respiration (Tan et al., 2016). In contrast, PGC-1α acts as a tumor suppressor
in some cancer types, with overexpression resulting in induction of apoptosis (Tan et al.,
2016). Additionally, PGC-1α is downregulated in hypoxia inducible factor-1 alpha (HIF-1α)
activated renal cell carcinomas, reinforcing a switch to glycolytic metabolism in low oxygen
conditions (LaGory et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2007). Therefore, it is important to identify
factors that contribute to the dichotomous effect of PGC-1α on tumor viability, as this has
the potential to identify specific susceptibilities for cancer subtypes.
PGC-1α dependent mitochondrial biogenesis may also support anchorage-independent
cancer cell growth, a key step in metastasis. Proteomic analysis identified upregulation of
mitochondrial proteins involved in metabolism and biogenesis upon low attachment culture
conditions (Lamb et al., 2014). Additionally, increased mitochondrial mass co-enriched with
tumor initiating activity in patient derived breast cancer lines, which could be blocked by
PGC-1α inhibition (De Luca et al., 2015). These findings remain relevant in vivo, as
circulating tumor cells (CTCs) developed from primary orthotopic breast tumors show
increased mitochondrial biogenesis and respiration, with PGC-1α silencing resulting in
decreased CTCs and metastasis (LeBleu et al., 2014). Thus, PGC-1α dependent
mitochondrial biogenesis may contribute to tumor metastatic potential.

Author Manuscript

A key activator of mitochondrial biogenesis in cancer is c-Myc, a transcription factor that
globally regulates cell cycle, growth, metabolism and apoptosis. Over 400 mitochondrial
genes are identified as c-Myc targets, and initial studies demonstrated that gain/loss of Myc
increases/reduces mitochondrial mass respectively. (Li et al., 2005). In normal physiology, cMyc couples mitochondrial biogenesis with cell cycle progression. However, elevated
mitochondrial biogenesis due to oncogenic c-Myc increases cellular biosynthetic and
respiratory capacity by upregulating mitochondrial metabolism to support rapid
proliferation, complementing c-Myc’s effects on stimulating cell cycle progression and
glycolytic metabolism to coordinate rapid cell growth (Figure 3).

Author Manuscript

Another effector of mitochondrial biogenesis is the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)
signaling pathway, which is critical for cellular growth and energy homeostasis and is
misregulated in many diseases including cancer. mTOR regulates mitochondrial biogenesis
both transcriptionally via PGC-1α/Yin Yang 1 (YY1) activation, resulting in mitochondrial
gene expression, and translationally via repression of inhibitory 4E-binding proteins (4EBPs) that downregulate translation of nuclear-encoded mitochondrial proteins (Morita et al.,
2015) (Figure 3).
The transcriptional networks regulating biogenesis impact therapeutic outcomes by
providing cancer cells with metabolic flexibility to adapt to targeted treatments and tumor

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Vyas et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

microenvironments. In B-Raf or N-Ras mutant melanomas, resistance to MEK inhibitors
was partially due to a switch to oxidative metabolism mediated by PGC-1α upregulation and
was overcome by mTORC1/2 inhibition, which repressed PGC-1α expression (Gopal et al.,
2014; Haq et al., 2013). Likewise, in a mouse model of K-Ras mutant pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma, cells that survive oncogene ablation have increased PGC-1α expression
and mitochondrial function and the reliance on mitochondrial respiration resulted in
sensitivity to oxidative phosphorylation inhibitors (Viale et al., 2014). Cancer cells can adapt
their mitochondrial function according to the specific stress. For example, c-Myc
upregulation and glycolytic gene expression enables resistance to metformin, a complex I
inhibitor, in pancreatic cancer cells, which actively utilize mitochondrial respiration due to
PGC-1α expression (Sancho et al., 2015). Similarly, c-Myc dependent mitochondrial
biogenesis is normally opposed by the HIF-1α signaling pathway, but this balance is altered
during oncogenic c-Myc driven transformation (Dang et al., 2008). Therefore, an important
consideration in cancer therapeutics will be addressing routes of bioenergetic plasticity
provided by mitochondria.

Author Manuscript

Mitophagy

Author Manuscript

Clearance of damaged mitochondria via mitophagy is critical for cellular fitness since
dysfunctional mitochondria can impair ETC function and increase oxidative stress. A major
trigger for mitophagy is via the PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1)/Parkin pathway.
This pathway is activated upon mitochondrial membrane depolarization, a signal of
mitochondrial dysfunction that results from multiple causes including lack of reducing
equivalents, hypoxia and impaired electron transport. An alternate pathway for mitophagy
induction is through the HIF-1α target genes BCL2 and adenovirus E1B 19 kDa-interacting
protein 3 (BNIP3) and BNIP3-like (BNIP3L/NIX), which inhibit mitochondrial respiration
during hypoxic conditions that could result in excessive ROS.

Author Manuscript

Is mitophagy beneficial or harmful to cancers? Similar to autophagy, which is shown to be
both pro- and anti-tumorgenic based on context, the function of mitophagy in transformation
likely depends on tumor stage (Mancias and Kimmelman, 2016). Mitophagy-deficient
Parkin null mice develop spontaneous hepatic tumors, and Parkin loss increases
tumorigenesis in multiple cancer models (Matsuda et al., 2015). Additionally, BNIP3 and
NIX are identified as tumor suppressors in multiple cancer models (Chourasia et al., 2015).
Thus, in certain stages of tumorigenesis, decreased mitophagy may allow for a permissive
threshold of dysfunctional mitochondria to persist, generating increased tumor-promoting
ROS or other tumorigenic mitochondrial signals. In contrast, established tumors may require
mitophagy for stress adaptation and survival. Supporting this concept, BNIP3 is induced in
patient glioblastoma samples in response to hypoxia caused by anti-angiogenic therapy and
combinatorial angiogenesis and autophagy inhibition had a potent anti-tumor effect in
xenograft glioma models (Hu et al., 2012). Additionally, oncogenic K-Ras driven
transformation upregulates mitophagy for the clearance of dysfunctional mitochondria, and
the accumulation of dysfunctional mitochondria switches adenoma tumor fate to benign
oncocytomas instead of carcinomas (Guo et al., 2013).

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Vyas et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript

Fission and Fusion Dynamics

Author Manuscript

Mitochondria are extremely dynamic and the balance of fission and fusion dictates their
morphology. A critical step in mitochondrial membrane fission is dynamin-related protein-1
(Drp1) recruitment to mitochondria and interaction with its outer mitochondria membrane
(OMM) receptors, where it causes membrane constriction fueled by GTPase activity. Drp1
mitochondrial translocation and activity is regulated by phosphorylation mediated by
multiple kinases that respond to distinct cell cycle and stress conditions (Mishra and Chan,
2016). The mitofusins, Mfn1 and Mfn2, along with optic atrophy-1 (Opa1) mediate
mitochondrial fusion. Mitochondria exist as either fused, tubular networks or as fragmented
granules depending on cellular state, with mitochondrial metabolism, respiration and
oxidative stress regulating fission/fusion machinery (Mishra and Chan, 2016). Mitochondrial
morphology also affects susceptibility to mitophagy and apoptosis (Kasahara and Scorrano,
2014).
Multiple studies have demonstrated an imbalance of fission and fusion activities in cancer,
with elevated fission activity and/or decreased fusion resulting in a fragmented
mitochondrial network (Senft and Ronai, 2016). Importantly, restoration of fused
mitochondrial networks in these studies, through either Drp1 knockdown/ inhibition or Mfn2
overexpression, impaired cancer cell growth, suggesting that mitochondrial network
remodeling is important in tumorigenesis. Increased Drp1 expression is associated with a
migratory phenotype in multiple cancer types, further highlighting the role of mitochondrial
dynamics in metastasis (Senft and Ronai, 2016).

Author Manuscript

Altered mitochondrial dynamics are a key feature of K-Ras dependent cellular
transformation, with oncogenic K-Ras stimulating mitochondrial fragmentation via ERK1/2mediated phosphorylation of Drp1 (Kashatus et al., 2015; Serasinghe et al., 2015).
Knockdown or inhibition of Drp1 renders cells resistant to oncogenic K-Ras mediated
transformation and impairs tumor growth (Kashatus et al., 2015). Additionally, remodeling
of the mitochondrial network upon oncogenic K-Ras expression affected mitochondrial
function, decreasing membrane potential and increasing ROS generation (Serasinghe et al.,
2015). Thus, K-Ras mediated mitochondrial network remodeling creates a state of
upregulated tumorigenic stimuli to support cellular transformation. c-Myc also affects
mitochondrial dynamics by altering the expression levels of multiple fission and fusion
proteins (Graves et al., 2012). However, the net effect causes mitochondrial fusion (von Eyss
et al., 2015), and further studies are needed to understand the differential effects of
oncogenic signaling pathways on mitochondrial dynamics.

Author Manuscript

Cell Death
A hallmark of cancers is their ability to evade cell death, a phenomenon tightly linked to
mitochondria. The pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 family members BAX and BAK are recruited to the
OMM and oligomerize to mediate mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization
(MOMP), resulting in pore formation and cytochrome c release from mitochondria into the
cytosol to activate caspases, the executors of programmed cell death. During normal
physiology, anti-apoptotic family members such as Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL bind and inhibit BAX/

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Vyas et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript

BAK. Tumor cells escape apoptosis by downregulating pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 genes and/or
upregulating anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 genes, achieved through multiple mechanisms reviewed
elsewhere (Lopez and Tait, 2015). The balance of pro- and anti-apoptotic proteins affects a
cancer cell’s susceptibility to apoptotic stimuli and may predict how a tumor will respond to
chemotherapy (Sarosiek et al., 2013).

Author Manuscript

Mitochondrial shape also dictates apoptotic susceptibility, as Drp1 loss delays cytochrome c
release and apoptotic induction, although follow-up work indicated that fission was not
required for Bax/Bak-mediated apoptosis (Martinou and Youle, 2011). Instead, a GTPaseindependent function of Drp1 in membrane remodeling and hemifusion results in Bax
oligomerization and subsequent MOMP, indicating that Drp1 can promote apoptosis
independent of fission (Martinou and Youle, 2011). The importance of mitochondrial shape
in apoptosis is further demonstrated by Mfn-1 loss-induced mitochondrial
hyperfragmentation causing resistance to apoptotic stimuli due to loss of Bax interaction
with the mitochondrial membranes. In this study, Drp1 inhibition rescued sensitivity to
apoptotic stimuli by restoring a balanced mitochondrial network (Renault et al., 2015).
Additionally, Mfn1 is a target of the MEK/ERK signaling pathway - phosphorylated Mfn1
inhibits mitochondria fusion and interacts with BAK to stimulate its oligomerization and
subsequent MOMP (Pyakurel et al., 2015). Therefore, while fission and fusion do not
necessarily regulate apoptosis per se, a balance of these activities appears to generate a
mitochondrial shape that supports interactions with pro-apoptotic Bcl2 proteins.

Oxidative Stress

Author Manuscript

ROS, in the form of superoxide and hydroxyl free radicals and hydrogen peroxide, are
produced from physiological metabolic reactions. Mitochondria are major contributors to
cellular ROS and have multiple antioxidant pathways to neutralize ROS including
superoxide dismutase (SOD2), glutathione, thioredoxin and peroxiredoxins. The early
observation that cancer cells have high ROS levels led to an overly simple hypothesis that
inhibiting ROS could be a successful therapeutic strategy. However, a more complex picture
is emerging, where ROS stimulates signaling and proliferation, and the concomitant
upregulation of antioxidant pathways prevents ROS-mediated cytotoxicity and may even
enhance tumor survival (Shadel and Horvath, 2015; Sullivan and Chandel, 2014).

Author Manuscript

Multiple physiological reactions, including electron transport by the ETC and NAD(P)H
oxidases result in ROS production, and these are often exacerbated during tumorigenesis by
oncogenic signaling, ETC mutations, and hypoxic microenvironments. High levels of ROS
contribute to oxidation of macromolecules, such as lipids, proteins and DNA, and can
contribute to genomic instability to promote transformation. However, modest elevations of
ROS observed in many tumors can regulate cell signaling via cysteine oxidation. Indeed,
H2O2 inactivates the tumor suppressor PTEN by oxidizing active site cysteine residues,
causing the formation of a disulfide bond, which prevents PTEN from inactivating the PI3K
pathway (Sullivan and Chandel, 2014). Since ROS can inactivate protein tyrosine
phosphatases through oxidation of cysteine residues, ROS may have many yet to be
discovered effects on diverse, mitogen-activated pathways that are normally inhibited by
phosphatases (Sullivan and Chandel, 2014). ROS-mediated regulation of oncogenic

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Vyas et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript

signaling also effects metastasis – oxidation of cysteines in Src increased its oncogenic
ability, promoting tumor cell migration and metastasis in multiple tumor types, and these
phenotypes were blocked by a ROS scavenger (Porporato et al., 2014).

Author Manuscript

In response to elevated ROS, many tumors upregulate protective antioxidant pathways. For
example, oncogenic K-Ras, B-raf and c-Myc actively inhibit ROS through regulation of
nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2 (NRF2), a transcriptional regulator of the
antioxidant response, to promote tumorigenesis (DeNicola et al., 2011). Similarly, a study in
melanoma found that circulating tumor cells had higher levels of NADPH than primary
tumor sites, presumably to combat the increased ROS caused by stress of metastasis
(Piskounova et al., 2015). In this system, antioxidants promoted distant metastasis, while
folate pathway inhibition prevented metastasis due to decreased NADPH production, but had
no effect on the primary tumor. Similarly, antioxidant treatment increased the number of
metastasis in a mouse model of malignanat melanoma, causing increased invasiveness
dependent on glutathione synthesis cells (Le Gal et al., 2015). Thus, successful tumors
maintain ROS levels within a window that stimulates proliferation without causing
cytotoxicity. The balance of ROS production and antioxidant expression is critical for
maintaining this tumor-promoting ROS level.

Author Manuscript

The requirement for upregulated antioxidant pathways may be an Achilles heel for tumor
cells; combination therapy using glutathione and thioredoxin pathway inhibitors has
promising results in vitro and in vivo in breast cancer models (Harris et al., 2015). Targeting
other aspects of mitochondrial metabolism that contribute to redox regulation has also been
proven to be a successful anti-cancer strategy. For example, inhibition of glutamate
dehydrogenase 1 (GDH1) increased ROS by reducing levels of fumarate, an activator of
antioxidant glutathione peroxidase 1 (GPx) to slow cancer growth (Jin et al., 2015).

Metabolism
One hallmark of tumors is metabolic reprogramming, which supports macromolecule
synthesis, bioenergetic demand and cellular survival (Pavlova and Thompson, 2016).
Mitochondria are hubs for metabolic reactions and drive this reprogramming through
multiple mechanisms.
Alterations in glucose utilization

Author Manuscript

Many tumors divert glycolytic intermediates into the pentose phosphate pathway, serine
biosynthesis and lipid biosynthesis, as opposed to complete oxidation by mitochondrial
respiration. In some tumors, this is achieved by limiting pyruvate utilization by
mitochondria. The availability of pyruvate for mitochondrial oxidation is regulated by
pyruvate kinase (PKM), which catalyzes the final step of glycolysis to generate pyruvate.
Cancers specifically upregulate the PKM2 isoform, which has low activity, allowing
upstream glycolytic intermediates to accumulate and be used for anabolic processes
(Christofk et al., 2008). Additionally, the mitochondrial pyruvate carrier (MPC1 and MPC2)
is either lost or downregulated in a number of cancers (Schell et al., 2014). MPC reexpression had a profound effect on reducing tumor growth in xenograft models, suggesting
that the expression of this fuel gatekeeper is an important determinant of growth (Yang et al.,

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Vyas et al.

Page 8

Author Manuscript

2014). Furthermore, MPC loss stimulates compensatory pathways that maintain fuel
oxidation by the TCA cycle, including upregulation of glutaminolysis and the use of fatty
acids and branched chain amino acids, demonstrating mitochondrial metabolic flexibility
(Schell et al., 2014; Vacanti et al., 2014; Yang et al., 2014). Thus, mitochondria remain
functional during aerobic glycolysis, and mitochondrial-dependent metabolic
reprogramming can support bioenergetic homeostasis during Warburg metabolism.
Reprogramming of amino acid metabolism

Author Manuscript

Glutamine can be a substrate for TCA cycle oxidation and a starting material for
macromolecule synthesis (DeBerardinis et al., 2007). The amide nitrogen on glutamine is
used in purine synthesis and glutamine-derived carbons are used in pyrimidine synthesis,
amino acid synthesis and lipid synthesis. Catabolism of glutamine, termed glutaminolysis, is
elevated in many glutamine-addicted tumors and is often driven by c-Myc upregulation of
glutaminase (GLS), which converts glutamine to glutamate and ammonia (Stine et al.,
2015). Glutamate is oxidized to α-ketoglutarate (α-KG) by GDH, providing an entry point
into the TCA cycle. This process is inhibited by the mitochondrial-localized sirtuin, SIRT4,
a tumor suppressor in multiple cancer models. SIRT4 expression in B cell lymphoma cells
downregulates glutamine uptake and inhibits growth whereas SIRT4 loss in an Eμ-myc B
cell lymphoma model increases glutamine consumption and accelerates tumorigenesis
(Jeong et al., 2014). In addition, transaminases utilize glutamate nitrogen to couple α-KG
production to synthesis of non-essential amino acids. Transaminases, but not GDH, are
upregulated in 3D cultures of proliferating mammary epithelial cells compared to quiescent
cells, suggesting that this pathway is important during cancer cell proliferation to support
biosynthesis (Coloff et al., 2016).

Author Manuscript

In tumor cells with dysfunctional mitochondria due to ETC or TCA cycle enzyme
mutations, a fraction of glutamine-derived α-KG undergoes reductive carboxylation to
support biosynthesis and redox homeostasis (Mullen et al., 2012). This pathway is
dependent on the NADP+/NADPH-utilizing isocitrate dehydrogenase isoforms IDH1
(cytosolic) and IDH2 (mitochondrial), catalyzing the reverse reaction of isocitrate
production from α-KG. Reductive carboxylation can also support anchorage independent
tumor growth in spheroid cultures by mitigating mitochondrial ROS in a coordinated cycle
where cytosolic reductive carboxylation by IDH1 supports mitochondrial oxidative
metabolism and NADPH production by IDH2 (Jiang et al., 2016).

Author Manuscript

As nutrients are oxidized to produce biosynthetic precursors, electrons are removed from
carbon. Therefore, electron acceptors can quickly become limiting in highly proliferating
cells. This observation was highlighted in a series of studies demonstrating that beyond ATP
production, mitochondrial respiration is required to replenish electron-accepting cofactors
NAD+ and FAD (Birsoy et al., 2015; Sullivan et al., 2015). Interestingly, when
mitochondrial respiration is impaired, rather than ATP, the electron acceptors are most
limiting for de novo synthesis of aspartate, a key amino acid required for protein and
nucleotide synthesis.
Aside from coordinating fuel oxidation, mitochondria contribute to tumor progression
through nucleotide synthesis via one-carbon metabolism. The mitochondrial folate synthesis
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Vyas et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

pathway consists of serine hydroxylmethyltransferase (SHMT2) and MTHFD2. A metaanalysis of gene expression profiles identified MTHFD2 as overexpressed in many human
tumors and further studies revealed its importance in survival of cancer cells (Nilsson et al.,
2014). Unlike the cytosolic arm of folate metabolism that primarily uses serine, the
mitochondrial arm also uses glycine as a carbon source, a potential vulnerability for cancers
that upregulate this pathway. Metabolic profiling of NCI-60 lines revealed high correlation
of proliferation with glycine consumption along with the increase in SHMT2, MTHFD2,
and MTHFD1L (Jain et al., 2012). While the cytosolic pathway can compensate for loss of
mitochondrial 1C metabolism, cells become dependent on extracellular serine and glycine
for growth and are thus susceptible to inhibition of serine catabolism, highlighting the
important of mitochondrial 1C metabolism in supporting tumorigenesis during nutrient
deprivation (Ducker et al., 2016). For example, SHMT2 is expressed in ischaemic tumor
zones, providing proliferative advantage under hypoxic conditions (Kim et al., 2015).
Additionally SHMT2 regulation of serine metabolism also contributes to NADPH
production and detoxification of ROS under hypoxia, a function important for survival of
MYC-driven cancers (Ye et al., 2014).
Lipid metabolism

Author Manuscript

Unlike other fuels, lipid utilization in cancer is less defined at the molecular level. Cancerspecific alterations of lipid metabolism seem to be unique to tumor type, allowing for some
cancers to upregulate fatty acid oxidation (FAO) while others are more dependent on lipid
synthesis. Upregulation of lipogenesis is postulated to be a common feature across most
tumors, in part to produce membranes for proliferation (Currie et al., 2013). Inhibition of
ATP-citrate lyase (ACLY), which converts mitochondrial-derived citrate to acetyl-CoA in
the cytoplasm to support lipogenesis, impairs tumorigenesis in multiple models (Currie et
al., 2013). In contrast certain cancer types including lymphomas and leukemias rely
primarily on FAO for ATP production (Carracedo et al., 2013). Additionally, FAO may be a
preferred fuel choice for cancers undergoing stress as it is a crucial survival mechanism for
breast cancer cells undergoing loss of attachment to the extracellular matrix (Carracedo et
al., 2013). However, mechanisms that upregulate FAO in cancers remain poorly understood.
In one example, tumor cell upregulation of the brain-specific isoform of carnitine
palmitoyltransferase (Cpt-1c), required for mitochondrial FA import, resulted in increased
FAO and ATP production and resistance to metabolic stress (Carracedo et al., 2013).
Moreover, increased FAO may confer benefits beyond ATP generation such as maintaining
redox homeostasis (Carracedo et al., 2013). Finally, production of acetyl-CoA from oxidized
fatty acids could be used for epigenetic remodeling of chromatin, subsequently causing
lasting changes in metabolism.

Author Manuscript

Studying cancer metabolism in vivo
Recent work has highlighted the importance of studying cancer metabolism in models
comparable to the in vivo disease. For example, while glutamine fuels TCA cycle
anaplerosis in vitro, this is not necessarily true of all tumors in vivo. Studies comparing the
fate of labeled glucose and glutamine in mouse models of K-Ras- driven non-small cell lung
cancer showed minimal contribution of glutamine to TCA cycle intermediates (Davidson et
al., 2016). Additionally, studies in glioblastoma cells showed that glutamine dependent
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Vyas et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript

anaplerosis was not required for growth, with cells secreting glutamate even under glutamine
starvation conditions (Tardito et al., 2015). In this study, glutamine synthase (GS) expression
sustained growth and purine nucleotide biosynthesis during glutamine starvation.
Furthermore, primary patient derived glioma stem-like cells grew independently of
glutamine supplementation. These studies highlight the importance of understanding in vivo
metabolic requirements of tumor cells when designing therapeutic strategies.

Mitochondrial Signaling

Author Manuscript

Mitochondrial biology and tumorigenic signaling intersect at multiple levels. First, classical
oncogenic signaling pathways alter mitochondrial functions to support tumorigenesis.
Second, direct signals from mitochondria affect cellular physiology and tumorigenesis.
Finally, mutations in mitochondrial enzymes can result in oncometabolite production, a
novel set of mitochondrial signaling molecules that function in tumor initiation.
Classical oncogenic and tumor suppressive pathways regulate mitochondrial biology
The resurgence of mitochondrial research has led to the discovery that established tumor
suppressors and oncogenes directly regulate mitochondrial biology. Several hallmark cancer
signaling pathways that alter mitochondrial biology to promote transformation are described
herein (Figure 3).

Author Manuscript

In addition to promoting mitochondrial biogenesis, numerous studies have linked c-Myc
with mitochondrial metabolism in cancer. The importance of mitochondrial metabolism in cMyc driven growth was demonstrated in a functional screen of Myc responsive cDNAs to
rescue cell growth of c-Myc null cells. The screen identified SHMT2, the first reaction in
mitochondrial one-carbon metabolism, as the only target that could partially rescue growth
(Nikiforov et al., 2002). While the tumorigenic contribution of increased mitochondrial
biogenesis and metabolism in oncogenic c-Myc driven cancers is difficult to separate from
its global upregulation of transcription, suppression of glutaminolysis can inhibit
proliferation of c-Myc driven lymphoma cells (Jeong et al., 2014; Le et al., 2012).

Author Manuscript

An important signaling pathway in hypoxic tumor microenvironments is mediated by
HIF-1α, which upregulates glycolytic metabolism in low oxygen conditions and inhibits
mitochondrial respiration (Mucaj et al., 2012). Mitochondrial derived ROS also regulates the
HIF-1α pathway via inhibition of prolyl hydroxylases (PHDs), negative regulators of HIF
signaling. SIRT3, a mitochondrial deacetylase, is an important regulator of this pathway by
maintaining ROS and redox homeostasis via deacetylation and activation of mitochondrial
SOD2 and IDH2, and indirectly through transcriptional upregulation of antioxidant
pathways (Bause and Haigis, 2013). SIRT3-dependent reduction in mitochondrial ROS
results in HIF-1α degradation, limiting glycolysis and the Warburg effect in tumors (Bell et
al., 2011; Finley et al., 2011).
In addition to the pleotropic effects of oncogenic K-Ras signaling on proliferation, apoptosis
and metabolism, oncogenic K-Ras results in a coordinated program of mitochondrial
regulation that supports transformation (Pylayeva-Gupta et al., 2011). Multiple K-Rasdependent mechanisms can downregulate mitochondrial respiration including upregulation

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Vyas et al.

Page 11

Author Manuscript

of mitochondrial fission (Kashatus et al., 2015; Serasinghe et al., 2015), transcriptional
downregulation of complex I (Wang et al., 2015) and ERK-phosphorylation dependent
mitochondrial translocation of phosphoglycerate kinase I (PGK1) (Li et al., 2016).
Oncogenic K-Ras also promotes upregulation of mitophagy to preserve mitochondrial
function under starvation conditions. Autophagy inhibition in cancers with active K-Ras
results in a decline in mitochondrial respiration, TCA metabolite and energy levels during
starvation, which may be important for tumor cell survival in nutrient-depleted
microenvironments (Guo et al., 2011).

Author Manuscript

The PI3K/Akt signaling pathway stimulates cell growth and is often activated in cancer
either through oncogenic mutations in signaling kinases or loss/ mutation of the PTEN
tumor suppressor, a key phosphatase that shuts off this pathway (Papa et al., 2014).
Although PI3K signaling is induces cell growth and upregulates glycolysis, metabolic
adaptation via a switch to mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation can mediate resistance to
PI3K inhibitors, undermining the effectiveness of PI3K-specific targeted therapy (Ghosh et
al., 2015). A major downstream effector of active PI3K/Akt signaling is mTOR, which
participates in mTORC1 and mTORC2 signaling complexes to couple nutrient and growth
factor sensing to cellular growth through regulation of translation, anabolic metabolism and
autophagy (Dibble and Cantley, 2015). In addition to regulating mitochondrial biogenesis,
mTORC1 stimulates multiple mitochondrial metabolic pathways. The transcriptional
repression of SIRT4 downstream of mTORC1 activity results in GDH activation to
upregulate glutaminolysis (Csibi et al., 2013). mTORC1 also induces the mitochondrial
folate pathway to promote de novo purine synthesis via activation of the transcription factor
ATF4 to result in upregulation of MTHFD2 expression (Ben-Sahra et al., 2016).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The AMP-regulated kinase (AMPK) signaling network is activated by during low energy
conditions, directly inhibiting multiple targets including mTORC1 to restore energy
homeostasis. AMPK is a critical downstream target of the liver kinase B1 (LKB1) tumor
suppressor, which is mutated in the inherited cancer disorder Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, and
mediates many LKB1 tumor suppressive functions (Faubert et al., 2015). However, AMPK
loss does not fully recapitulate LKB1 loss and AMPK has both pro and anti-tumorigenic
effects, which appear dependent on the presence of other oncogenic drivers as well as tumor
stage (Faubert et al., 2015). While uncoupling proliferation from energy sensing allows for
unhindered proliferation in the presence of oncogenic growth signaling, AMPK functions in
metabolic adaptation and mitochondrial homeostasis can be beneficial in established tumors.
For example, AMPK promotes mitophagy through phosphorylation of ULK kinases and is
required for cell survival during starvation (Faubert et al., 2015). Additionally, AMPK
activation in response to ETC dysfunction results in mitochondrial fragmentation through
direct phosphorylation of mitochondrial fission factor, an OMM receptor for Drp1 (Toyama
et al., 2016). Additionally, sustained energy deprivation can result in AMPK mediated
upregulation of mitochondrial biogenesis via PGC-1α – allowing the cell further metabolic
plasticity (Faubert et al., 2015).
p53 is a commonly mutated tumor suppressor and has been extensively studied due to its
transcriptional regulation of cell cycle and apoptotic genes. It is now appreciated that p53
also has functions in the regulation of cellular metabolism via transcriptional activation of

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Vyas et al.

Page 12

Author Manuscript

metabolic genes (Berkers et al., 2013). p53 limits glycolysis and drives transcription of
genes required for ETC assembly and maintenance (Berkers et al., 2013). However, more
recent work has suggested an alternate side to p53’s role in tumorigenesis, with its ability to
allow for adaptation to metabolic stress resulting in pro-survival effects in tumor cells. These
pro-survival effects are partially accomplished through upregulation of mitochondrial FAO
and respiration, allowing cancer cells to adapt to starvation conditions (Jiang et al., 2015). In
addition to transcriptional regulation of mitochondrial activity, p53 also directly functions at
the mitochondria to induce apoptosis in response to stress via interactions with Bcl-2 family
members (Vaseva and Moll, 2009). Tumor-derived p53 mutations no longer interact with
Bcl2 and do not trigger mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization (Vaseva and Moll,
2009). Thus, in addition to effect its transcriptional activity, p53 mutations can also promote
cancer survival through direct mitochondrial functions.

Author Manuscript

Mitochondrial retrograde signals

Author Manuscript

Mitochondria are important stress sensors, and retrograde signaling from the mitochondria
allows the cell to adapt to its environment. Metabolites generated by mitochondrial
metabolic pathways including the TCA cycle, β-oxidation, and the ETC, affect both nuclear
gene transcription via chromatin modification as well as cytosolic signaling pathways. For
example, the TCA cycle intermediate α-KG is a cosubstrate for many enzymes in the
cytoplasm and nucleus including the PHD family, which inhibits HIF-1α signaling by
promoting its degradation, and the 10–11-translocation methylcytosine dioxygenase (TET)
and Jumunji-C histone demethylase (JHDM) families of chromatin modifying enzymes. In
the case of chromatin regulation, glutamine derived α-KG contributes to TET-dependent
demethylation reactions (Carey et al., 2015). Additional mitochondrial regulation of
chromatin occurs through histone acetylation. ACLY-dependent production of acetyl-CoA
from mitochondrial-derived citrate is used by histone acetyl transferases (HATs) and
oncogenic signaling pathways modify histone acetylation patterns in a ACLY dependent
manner (Lee et al., 2014; Wellen et al., 2009). In addition to chromatin modification, acetylCoA generated from mitochondrial-derived citrate is used for the acetylation of many
cytosolic and mitochondrial proteins to modulate protein activity. Thus, mitochondrial
derived metabolites can effect signaling pathways, nuclear transcription, and chromatin
modification.

Author Manuscript

In addition to signaling molecules, readouts of mitochondrial integrity including Δψm and
MOMP also function as important signals, enabling the cell to respond to unhealthy/
dysfunctional mitochondria. Since the membrane potential generated by healthy
mitochondria is required for protein import into the mitochondrial matrix and
intermembrane space via the TIM22 and TIM23 translocator complexes, loss of membrane
potential impairs import. If the defect in protein import is severe, the cell can initiate
mitophagy to clear these unhealthy mitochondria as discussed above. Additionally, ATP
generation by the ETC is an important signaling output with diminished ETC activity
increasing the AMP/ATP ratio to activate AMPK signaling. ETC dysfunction can also result
in decreased NAD+ levels, a co-substrate for both the sirtuin and poly(ADP-ribose) protein
families, which have many functions in tumorigenesis (German and Haigis, 2015; Vyas and

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Vyas et al.

Page 13

Author Manuscript

Chang, 2014). Finally, ROS regulates cytosolic signaling networks to promote tumorigenesis
(as discussed above).
Mitochondrial oncometabolites

Author Manuscript

Dominant mutations in mitochondrial enzymes led to the exciting identification of
mitochondrial-derived signaling molecules, termed oncometabolites. Mutant versions of
cytoplasmic and mitochondrial IDH isoforms, found in a striking 10% of acute myeloid
leukemias and 70% of glioblastomas, reduce α-KG to generate the oncometabolite (R)-2hydroxyglutarate ((R)-2-HG) (Dang et al., 2009; Ward et al., 2010). In addition, loss of
function of TCA cycle enzymes succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) and fumarate hydratase
(FH), underlying the inherited cancer predispositions Hereditary Paraganglioma Syndrome
and Hereditary Leiomyomatosis and Renal-Cell Cancer syndrome respectively, result in the
accumulation of metabolic intermediates succinate and fumarate, which function as
oncometabolites when in excess.

Author Manuscript

A major mode of action of these oncometabolites is owed to their structural similarity to αKG, allowing them to act as competitive inhibitors of α-KG-dependent enzymes including
the TET and JHDM families of chromatin modifying enzymes and the PHD family
(Nowicki and Gottlieb, 2015). Inhibition of TET activity leads to hypermethylation of CpG
islands, found near gene promoters, which results in gene silencing (Nowicki and Gottlieb,
2015). Additionally, repressive histone methylation marks on H3K9 and H3K27 are
observed in IDH1 and IDH2 mutant gliomas due to JHDM inhibition (Lu et al., 2012).
Therefore, through the production of oncometabolites, mitochondria exert strong influence
on chromatin structure, and can result in tumor initiation. Both succinate and fumarate
accumulation stabilize HIF-1α via PHD inhibition, reinforcing the Warburg effect
(MacKenzie et al., 2007; Nowicki and Gottlieb, 2015). In contrast, (R)-2-HG activates PHD
enzymes, diminishing HIF-1α levels, which resulted in the enhancement of proliferation of
astrocytes (Koivunen et al., 2012). (R)-2-HG alone reversibly recapitulates the effects of
IDH mutation on leukemogenesis while its enantiomer (S)-2-HG had no effect even though
it more potently inhibited TET2 and PHDs, suggesting that differential requirements for
HIF-1α depending on cell type can influence neoplasia (Losman et al., 2013).

Author Manuscript

FH deficiency also supports tumorigenesis independently of α-KG/HIF-1α. The high level
of fumarate accumulation in FH-deficient tumors/cells results in increased protein
succinylation through the covalent modification of fumarate on cysteines. Cysteine
succinylation inhibits Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1 (KEAP1), a negative regulator of
Nrf2, to result in upregulation of antioxidant pathways (Adam et al., 2011). Additionally,
accumulated fumarate can bind to glutathione to generate succinylated glutathione, an
alternate glutathione reductase substrate that decreases NADPH and increases ROS levels
(Sullivan et al., 2013). Thus, FH deficiency can alter redox homeostasis to promote
tumorigenesis.

Mitochondrial DNA mutations
The presence of a separate mitochondrial genome adds to the unique and complex biology of
this organelle, as mutations in mtDNA impact tumorigenesis. Mitochondria contain multiple

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Vyas et al.

Page 14

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

copies of a single circular DNA molecule that encodes for 13 ETC subunits, mitochondrial
ribosomes and tRNAs. In addition to distinct mtDNA haplotypes that exist among different
human populations, many germline and somatic mtDNA mutations associated with cancer
risk have been identified (van Gisbergen et al., 2015). Differences in mtDNA copy number
are implicated in tumorigenesis, although both low and high copy numbers have been
associated with various cancers, similar to the varying associations between mitochondrial
biogenesis and tumorigenesis. Although the functional consequence of many of these
polymorphisms/ mutations is not well understood, some mutations occur in ETC genes and
can result in increased oxidative stress due to ETC dysfunction to promote tumorigenesis.
Since mitochondria contain multiple copies of the mtDNA genome, cells are either
homoplasmic or heteroplasmic regarding their mtDNA composition, with mutant copies of
the genome spreading through the mitochondrial network through fission and fusion cycles.
In this way, dominant mtDNA mutations become established in a clonal cell population.
mtDNA mutations and haplotypes associated with various cancer types are reviewed
elsewhere (van Gisbergen et al., 2015).

Concluding Remarks

Author Manuscript

Mitochondria are complex organelles that influence cancer initiation, growth, survival and
metastasis, and many facets of mitochondrial biology beyond energy production actively
contribute to tumorigenesis. These include mitochondrial mass, dynamics, cell death
regulation, redox homeostasis, metabolic regulation and signaling. The interplay between
these aspects of mitochondrial biology results in coordinated programs of mitochondrial
regulation of cellular physiology and highlights the pleiotropic functions of mitochondria in
cancer. Additionally, similar to the transforming discoveries of oncogenic mutations in
growth factor signaling pathways, mutations in mitochondrial metabolic enzymes are a
exciting new frontier in cancer biology.
The flexibility that mitochondria bestow tumor cells, including alterations in fuel utilization,
bioenergetics, cell death susceptibility, and oxidative stress, allows for survival in the face of
adverse environmental conditions such as starvation and during chemotherapeutic and
targeted cancer treatments. Therefore, in order to effectively treat cancer, the escape routes
to therapeutic interventions provided by mitochondria must also be considered – future
studies into combination therapies that remove this flexibility will be important to advance
cancer treatments.

Acknowledgments
Author Manuscript

We apologize for all the primary literature and work we could not cite due to space limitations; this review is not
meant to be a comprehensive summary of all the work done in the field of mitochondrial functions in cancer. We
thank Jonathan Coloff, Lydia Finley, Karina Gonzalez, Jessica Spinelli and Alison Ringel for discussion on the
manuscript. S.V. is supported by a postdoctoral fellowship from the American Cancer Society (127097PF-14-255-01-TBE). E.Z. is supported by a postdoctoral fellowship from the American Heart Association
(15POST25560077). M.C.H. is supported by the Ludwig Center at Harvard, the Paul F. Glenn Foundation, and the
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (1R01DK103295-01A1).

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Vyas et al.

Page 15

Author Manuscript

References

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Adam J, Hatipoglu E, O’Flaherty L, Ternette N, Sahgal N, Lockstone H, Baban D, Nye E, Stamp GW,
Wolhuter K, Stevens M, Fischer R, Carmeliet P, Maxwell PH, Pugh CW, Frizzell N, Soga T, Kessler
BM, El-Bahrawy M, Ratcliffe PJ, Pollard PJ. Renal Cyst Formation in Fh1-Deficient Mice Is
Independent of the Hif/Phd Pathway: Roles for Fumarate in Keap1 Succination and Nrf2 Signaling.
Cancer Cell. 2011; 20:524–537. [PubMed: 22014577]
Aisenberg AC, Reinafarje B, Potter VR. Studies on the Pasteur Effect. I. General Observations. J Biol
Chem. 1957; 224:1099–1113. [PubMed: 13405937]
Bause AS, Haigis MC. Sirt3 Regulation of Mitochondrial Oxidative Stress. Exp Gerontol. 2013;
48:634–639. [PubMed: 22964489]
Bell EL, Emerling BM, Ricoult SJ, Guarente L. Sirt3 Suppresses Hypoxia Inducible Factor 1alpha and
Tumor Growth by Inhibiting Mitochondrial Ros Production. Oncogene. 2011; 30:2986–2996.
[PubMed: 21358671]
Ben-Sahra I, Hoxhaj G, Ricoult SJ, Asara JM, Manning BD. Mtorc1 Induces Purine Synthesis through
Control of the Mitochondrial Tetrahydrofolate Cycle. Science. 2016; 351:728–733. [PubMed:
26912861]
Berkers CR, Maddocks OD, Cheung EC, Mor I, Vousden KH. Metabolic Regulation by P53 Family
Members. Cell Metab. 2013; 18:617–633. [PubMed: 23954639]
Birsoy K, Wang T, Chen WW, Freinkman E, Abu-Remaileh M, Sabatini DM. An Essential Role of the
Mitochondrial Electron Transport Chain in Cell Proliferation Is to Enable Aspartate Synthesis. Cell.
2015; 162:540–551. [PubMed: 26232224]
Carey BW, Finley LW, Cross JR, Allis CD, Thompson CB. Intracellular Alpha-Ketoglutarate
Maintains the Pluripotency of Embryonic Stem Cells. Nature. 2015; 518:413–416. [PubMed:
25487152]
Carracedo A, Cantley LC, Pandolfi PP. Cancer Metabolism: Fatty Acid Oxidation in the Limelight. Nat
Rev Cancer. 2013; 13:227–232. [PubMed: 23446547]
Chourasia AH, Boland ML, Macleod KF. Mitophagy and Cancer. Cancer Metab. 2015; 3:4. [PubMed:
25810907]
Christofk HR, Vander Heiden MG, Harris MH, Ramanathan A, Gerszten RE, Wei R, Fleming MD,
Schreiber SL, Cantley LC. The M2 Splice Isoform of Pyruvate Kinase Is Important for Cancer
Metabolism and Tumour Growth. Nature. 2008; 452:230–233. [PubMed: 18337823]
Coloff JL, Murphy JP, Braun CR, Harris IS, Shelton LM, Kami K, Gygi SP, Selfors LM, Brugge JS.
Differential Glutamate Metabolism in Proliferating and Quiescent Mammary Epithelial Cells. Cell
Metab. 2016; 23:867–880. [PubMed: 27133130]
Csibi A, Fendt SM, Li C, Poulogiannis G, Choo AY, Chapski DJ, Jeong SM, Dempsey JM, Parkhitko
A, Morrison T, Henske EP, Haigis MC, Cantley LC, Stephanopoulos G, Yu J, Blenis J. The Mtorc1
Pathway Stimulates Glutamine Metabolism and Cell Proliferation by Repressing Sirt4. Cell. 2013;
153:840–854. [PubMed: 23663782]
Currie E, Schulze A, Zechner R, Walther TC, Farese RV Jr. Cellular Fatty Acid Metabolism and
Cancer. Cell Metab. 2013; 18:153–161. [PubMed: 23791484]
Dang CV, Kim JW, Gao P, Yustein J. The Interplay between Myc and Hif in Cancer. Nat Rev Cancer.
2008; 8:51–56. [PubMed: 18046334]
Dang L, White DW, Gross S, Bennett BD, Bittinger MA, Driggers EM, Fantin VR, Jang HG, Jin S,
Keenan MC, Marks KM, Prins RM, Ward PS, Yen KE, Liau LM, Rabinowitz JD, Cantley LC,
Thompson CB, Vander Heiden MG, Su SM. Cancer-Associated Idh1 Mutations Produce 2Hydroxyglutarate. Nature. 2009; 462:739–744. [PubMed: 19935646]
Davidson SM, Papagiannakopoulos T, Olenchock BA, Heyman JE, Keibler MA, Luengo A, Bauer
MR, Jha AK, O’Brien JP, Pierce KA, Gui DY, Sullivan LB, Wasylenko TM, Subbaraj L, Chin CR,
Stephanopolous G, Mott BT, Jacks T, Clish CB, Vander Heiden MG. Environment Impacts the
Metabolic Dependencies of Ras-Driven Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer. Cell Metab. 2016; 23:517–
528. [PubMed: 26853747]
De Luca A, Fiorillo M, Peiris-Pages M, Ozsvari B, Smith DL, Sanchez-Alvarez R, MartinezOutschoorn UE, Cappello AR, Pezzi V, Lisanti MP, Sotgia F. Mitochondrial Biogenesis Is

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Vyas et al.

Page 16

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Required for the Anchorage-Independent Survival and Propagation of Stem-Like Cancer Cells.
Oncotarget. 2015; 6:14777–14795. [PubMed: 26087310]
DeBerardinis RJ, Mancuso A, Daikhin E, Nissim I, Yudkoff M, Wehrli S, Thompson CB. Beyond
Aerobic Glycolysis: Transformed Cells Can Engage in Glutamine Metabolism That Exceeds the
Requirement for Protein and Nucleotide Synthesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007; 104:19345–
19350. [PubMed: 18032601]
DeNicola GM, Karreth FA, Humpton TJ, Gopinathan A, Wei C, Frese K, Mangal D, Yu KH, Yeo CJ,
Calhoun ES, Scrimieri F, Winter JM, Hruban RH, Iacobuzio-Donahue C, Kern SE, Blair IA,
Tuveson DA. Oncogene-Induced Nrf2 Transcription Promotes Ros Detoxification and
Tumorigenesis. Nature. 2011; 475:106–109. [PubMed: 21734707]
Dibble CC, Cantley LC. Regulation of Mtorc1 by Pi3k Signaling. Trends Cell Biol. 2015; 25:545–555.
[PubMed: 26159692]
Ducker GS, Chen L, Morscher RJ, Ghergurovich JM, Esposito M, Teng X, Kang Y, Rabinowitz JD.
Reversal of Cytosolic One-Carbon Flux Compensates for Loss of the Mitochondrial Folate
Pathway. Cell Metab. 2016
Ernster L, Schatz G. Mitochondria: A Historical Review. J Cell Biol. 1981; 91:227s–255s. [PubMed:
7033239]
Faubert B, Vincent EE, Poffenberger MC, Jones RG. The Amp-Activated Protein Kinase (Ampk) and
Cancer: Many Faces of a Metabolic Regulator. Cancer Lett. 2015; 356:165–170. [PubMed:
24486219]
Finley LW, Carracedo A, Lee J, Souza A, Egia A, Zhang J, Teruya-Feldstein J, Moreira PI, Cardoso
SM, Clish CB, Pandolfi PP, Haigis MC. Sirt3 Opposes Reprogramming of Cancer Cell
Metabolism through Hif1alpha Destabilization. Cancer Cell. 2011; 19:416–428. [PubMed:
21397863]
German NJ, Haigis MC. Sirtuins and the Metabolic Hurdles in Cancer. Curr Biol. 2015; 25:R569–583.
[PubMed: 26126285]
Ghosh JC, Siegelin MD, Vaira V, Faversani A, Tavecchio M, Chae YC, Lisanti S, Rampini P, Giroda
M, Caino MC, Seo JH, Kossenkov AV, Michalek RD, Schultz DC, Bosari S, Languino LR, Altieri
DC. Adaptive Mitochondrial Reprogramming and Resistance to Pi3k Therapy. J Natl Cancer Inst.
2015; 107
Gopal YN, Rizos H, Chen G, Deng W, Frederick DT, Cooper ZA, Scolyer RA, Pupo G, Komurov K,
Sehgal V, Zhang J, Patel L, Pereira CG, Broom BM, Mills GB, Ram P, Smith PD, Wargo JA, Long
GV, Davies MA. Inhibition of Mtorc1/2 Overcomes Resistance to Mapk Pathway Inhibitors
Mediated by Pgc1alpha and Oxidative Phosphorylation in Melanoma. Cancer Res. 2014; 74:7037–
7047. [PubMed: 25297634]
Graves JA, Wang Y, Sims-Lucas S, Cherok E, Rothermund K, Branca MF, Elster J, Beer-Stolz D, Van
Houten B, Vockley J, Prochownik EV. Mitochondrial Structure, Function and Dynamics Are
Temporally Controlled by C-Myc. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e37699. [PubMed: 22629444]
Guo JY, Chen HY, Mathew R, Fan J, Strohecker AM, Karsli-Uzunbas G, Kamphorst JJ, Chen G,
Lemons JM, Karantza V, Coller HA, Dipaola RS, Gelinas C, Rabinowitz JD, White E. Activated
Ras Requires Autophagy to Maintain Oxidative Metabolism and Tumorigenesis. Genes Dev. 2011;
25:460–470. [PubMed: 21317241]
Guo JY, Karsli-Uzunbas G, Mathew R, Aisner SC, Kamphorst JJ, Strohecker AM, Chen G, Price S, Lu
W, Teng X, Snyder E, Santanam U, Dipaola RS, Jacks T, Rabinowitz JD, White E. Autophagy
Suppresses Progression of K-Ras-Induced Lung Tumors to Oncocytomas and Maintains Lipid
Homeostasis. Genes Dev. 2013; 27:1447–1461. [PubMed: 23824538]
Haq R, Shoag J, Andreu-Perez P, Yokoyama S, Edelman H, Rowe GC, Frederick DT, Hurley AD,
Nellore A, Kung AL, Wargo JA, Song JS, Fisher DE, Arany Z, Widlund HR. Oncogenic Braf
Regulates Oxidative Metabolism Via Pgc1alpha and Mitf. Cancer Cell. 2013; 23:302–315.
[PubMed: 23477830]
Harris IS, Treloar AE, Inoue S, Sasaki M, Gorrini C, Lee KC, Yung KY, Brenner D, Knobbe-Thomsen
CB, Cox MA, Elia A, Berger T, Cescon DW, Adeoye A, Brustle A, Molyneux SD, Mason JM, Li
WY, Yamamoto K, Wakeham A, Berman HK, Khokha R, Done SJ, Kavanagh TJ, Lam CW, Mak
TW. Glutathione and Thioredoxin Antioxidant Pathways Synergize to Drive Cancer Initiation and
Progression. Cancer Cell. 2015; 27:211–222. [PubMed: 25620030]
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Vyas et al.

Page 17

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Hu YL, DeLay M, Jahangiri A, Molinaro AM, Rose SD, Carbonell WS, Aghi MK. Hypoxia-Induced
Autophagy Promotes Tumor Cell Survival and Adaptation to Antiangiogenic Treatment in
Glioblastoma. Cancer Res. 2012; 72:1773–1783. [PubMed: 22447568]
Jain M, Nilsson R, Sharma S, Madhusudhan N, Kitami T, Souza AL, Kafri R, Kirschner MW, Clish
CB, Mootha VK. Metabolite Profiling Identifies a Key Role for Glycine in Rapid Cancer Cell
Proliferation. Science. 2012; 336:1040–1044. [PubMed: 22628656]
Jeong SM, Lee A, Lee J, Haigis MC. Sirt4 Protein Suppresses Tumor Formation in Genetic Models of
Myc-Induced B Cell Lymphoma. J Biol Chem. 2014; 289:4135–4144. [PubMed: 24368766]
Jiang D, LaGory EL, Kenzelmann Broz D, Bieging KT, Brady CA, Link N, Abrams JM, Giaccia AJ,
Attardi LD. Analysis of P53 Transactivation Domain Mutants Reveals Acad11 as a Metabolic
Target Important for P53 Pro-Survival Function. Cell Rep. 2015; 10:1096–1109. [PubMed:
25704813]
Jiang L, Shestov AA, Swain P, Yang C, Parker SJ, Wang QA, Terada LS, Adams ND, McCabe MT,
Pietrak B, Schmidt S, Metallo CM, Dranka BP, Schwartz B, DeBerardinis RJ. Reductive
Carboxylation Supports Redox Homeostasis During Anchorage-Independent Growth. Nature.
2016; 532:255–258. [PubMed: 27049945]
Jin L, Li D, Alesi GN, Fan J, Kang HB, Lu Z, Boggon TJ, Jin P, Yi H, Wright ER, Duong D, Seyfried
NT, Egnatchik R, DeBerardinis RJ, Magliocca KR, He C, Arellano ML, Khoury HJ, Shin DM,
Khuri FR, Kang S. Glutamate Dehydrogenase 1 Signals through Antioxidant Glutathione
Peroxidase 1 to Regulate Redox Homeostasis and Tumor Growth. Cancer Cell. 2015; 27:257–270.
[PubMed: 25670081]
Kasahara A, Scorrano L. Mitochondria: From Cell Death Executioners to Regulators of Cell
Differentiation. Trends Cell Biol. 2014; 24:761–770. [PubMed: 25189346]
Kashatus JA, Nascimento A, Myers LJ, Sher A, Byrne FL, Hoehn KL, Counter CM, Kashatus DF.
Erk2 Phosphorylation of Drp1 Promotes Mitochondrial Fission and Mapk-Driven Tumor Growth.
Mol Cell. 2015; 57:537–551. [PubMed: 25658205]
Kim D, Fiske BP, Birsoy K, Freinkman E, Kami K, Possemato RL, Chudnovsky Y, Pacold ME, Chen
WW, Cantor JR, Shelton LM, Gui DY, Kwon M, Ramkissoon SH, Ligon KL, Kang SW, Snuderl
M, Vander Heiden MG, Sabatini DM. Shmt2 Drives Glioma Cell Survival in Ischaemia but
Imposes a Dependence on Glycine Clearance. Nature. 2015; 520:363–367. [PubMed: 25855294]
Koivunen P, Lee S, Duncan CG, Lopez G, Lu G, Ramkissoon S, Losman JA, Joensuu P, Bergmann U,
Gross S, Travins J, Weiss S, Looper R, Ligon KL, Verhaak RG, Yan H, Kaelin WG Jr.
Transformation by the (R)-Enantiomer of 2-Hydroxyglutarate Linked to Egln Activation. Nature.
2012; 483:484–488. [PubMed: 22343896]
LaGory EL, Wu C, Taniguchi CM, Ding CK, Chi JT, von Eyben R, Scott DA, Richardson AD, Giaccia
AJ. Suppression of Pgc-1alpha Is Critical for Reprogramming Oxidative Metabolism in Renal Cell
Carcinoma. Cell Rep. 2015; 12:116–127. [PubMed: 26119730]
Lamb R, Harrison H, Hulit J, Smith DL, Lisanti MP, Sotgia F. Mitochondria as New Therapeutic
Targets for Eradicating Cancer Stem Cells: Quantitative Proteomics and Functional Validation Via
Mct1/2 Inhibition. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:11029–11037. [PubMed: 25415228]
Le A, Lane AN, Hamaker M, Bose S, Gouw A, Barbi J, Tsukamoto T, Rojas CJ, Slusher BS, Zhang H,
Zimmerman LJ, Liebler DC, Slebos RJ, Lorkiewicz PK, Higashi RM, Fan TW, Dang CV. GlucoseIndependent Glutamine Metabolism Via Tca Cycling for Proliferation and Survival in B Cells. Cell
Metab. 2012; 15:110–121. [PubMed: 22225880]
Le Gal K, Ibrahim MX, Wiel C, Sayin VI, Akula MK, Karlsson C, Dalin MG, Akyurek LM, Lindahl P,
Nilsson J, Bergo MO. Antioxidants Can Increase Melanoma Metastasis in Mice. Sci Transl Med.
2015; 7:308re308.
LeBleu VS, O’Connell JT, Gonzalez Herrera KN, Wikman H, Pantel K, Haigis MC, de Carvalho FM,
Damascena A, Domingos Chinen LT, Rocha RM, Asara JM, Kalluri R. Pgc-1alpha Mediates
Mitochondrial Biogenesis and Oxidative Phosphorylation in Cancer Cells to Promote Metastasis.
Nat Cell Biol. 2014; 16:992–1003. 1001–1015. [PubMed: 25241037]
Lee JV, Carrer A, Shah S, Snyder NW, Wei S, Venneti S, Worth AJ, Yuan ZF, Lim HW, Liu S, Jackson
E, Aiello NM, Haas NB, Rebbeck TR, Judkins A, Won KJ, Chodosh LA, Garcia BA, Stanger BZ,
Feldman MD, Blair IA, Wellen KE. Akt-Dependent Metabolic Reprogramming Regulates Tumor
Cell Histone Acetylation. Cell Metab. 2014; 20:306–319. [PubMed: 24998913]
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Vyas et al.

Page 18

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Li F, Wang Y, Zeller KI, Potter JJ, Wonsey DR, O’Donnell KA, Kim JW, Yustein JT, Lee LA, Dang
CV. Myc Stimulates Nuclearly Encoded Mitochondrial Genes and Mitochondrial Biogenesis. Mol
Cell Biol. 2005; 25:6225–6234. [PubMed: 15988031]
Li X, Jiang Y, Meisenhelder J, Yang W, Hawke DH, Zheng Y, Xia Y, Aldape K, He J, Hunter T, Wang
L, Lu Z. Mitochondria-Translocated Pgk1 Functions as a Protein Kinase to Coordinate Glycolysis
and the Tca Cycle in Tumorigenesis. Mol Cell. 2016; 61:705–719. [PubMed: 26942675]
Lopez J, Tait SW. Mitochondrial Apoptosis: Killing Cancer Using the Enemy Within. Br J Cancer.
2015; 112:957–962. [PubMed: 25742467]
Losman JA, Looper RE, Koivunen P, Lee S, Schneider RK, McMahon C, Cowley GS, Root DE, Ebert
BL, Kaelin WG Jr. (R)-2-Hydroxyglutarate Is Sufficient to Promote Leukemogenesis and Its
Effects Are Reversible. Science. 2013; 339:1621–1625. [PubMed: 23393090]
Lu C, Ward PS, Kapoor GS, Rohle D, Turcan S, Abdel-Wahab O, Edwards CR, Khanin R, Figueroa
ME, Melnick A, Wellen KE, O’Rourke DM, Berger SL, Chan TA, Levine RL, Mellinghoff IK,
Thompson CB. Idh Mutation Impairs Histone Demethylation and Results in a Block to Cell
Differentiation. Nature. 2012; 483:474–478. [PubMed: 22343901]
MacKenzie ED, Selak MA, Tennant DA, Payne LJ, Crosby S, Frederiksen CM, Watson DG, Gottlieb
E. Cell-Permeating Alpha-Ketoglutarate Derivatives Alleviate Pseudohypoxia in Succinate
Dehydrogenase-Deficient Cells. Mol Cell Biol. 2007; 27:3282–3289. [PubMed: 17325041]
Mancias JD, Kimmelman AC. Mechanisms of Selective Autophagy in Normal Physiology and Cancer.
J Mol Biol. 2016; 428:1659–1680. [PubMed: 26953261]
Martinou JC, Youle RJ. Mitochondria in Apoptosis: Bcl-2 Family Members and Mitochondrial
Dynamics. Dev Cell. 2011; 21:92–101. [PubMed: 21763611]
Matsuda S, Nakanishi A, Minami A, Wada Y, Kitagishi Y. Functions and Characteristics of Pink1 and
Parkin in Cancer. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed). 2015; 20:491–501. [PubMed: 25553463]
Mishra P, Chan DC. Metabolic Regulation of Mitochondrial Dynamics. J Cell Biol. 2016; 212:379–
387. [PubMed: 26858267]
Morita M, Gravel SP, Hulea L, Larsson O, Pollak M, St-Pierre J, Topisirovic I. Mtor Coordinates
Protein Synthesis, Mitochondrial Activity and Proliferation. Cell Cycle. 2015; 14:473–480.
[PubMed: 25590164]
Mucaj V, Shay JE, Simon MC. Effects of Hypoxia and Hifs on Cancer Metabolism. Int J Hematol.
2012; 95:464–470. [PubMed: 22539362]
Mullen AR, Wheaton WW, Jin ES, Chen PH, Sullivan LB, Cheng T, Yang Y, Linehan WM, Chandel
NS, DeBerardinis RJ. Reductive Carboxylation Supports Growth in Tumour Cells with Defective
Mitochondria. Nature. 2012; 481:385–388. [PubMed: 22101431]
Nikiforov MA, Chandriani S, O’Connell B, Petrenko O, Kotenko I, Beavis A, Sedivy JM, Cole MD. A
Functional Screen for Myc-Responsive Genes Reveals Serine Hydroxymethyltransferase, a Major
Source of the One-Carbon Unit for Cell Metabolism. Mol Cell Biol. 2002; 22:5793–5800.
[PubMed: 12138190]
Nilsson R, Jain M, Madhusudhan N, Sheppard NG, Strittmatter L, Kampf C, Huang J, Asplund A,
Mootha VK. Metabolic Enzyme Expression Highlights a Key Role for Mthfd2 and the
Mitochondrial Folate Pathway in Cancer. Nat Commun. 2014; 5:3128. [PubMed: 24451681]
Nowicki S, Gottlieb E. Oncometabolites: Tailoring Our Genes. FEBS J. 2015; 282:2796–2805.
[PubMed: 25864878]
Papa A, Wan L, Bonora M, Salmena L, Song MS, Hobbs RM, Lunardi A, Webster K, Ng C, Newton
RH, Knoblauch N, Guarnerio J, Ito K, Turka LA, Beck AH, Pinton P, Bronson RT, Wei W,
Pandolfi PP. Cancer-Associated Pten Mutants Act in a Dominant-Negative Manner to Suppress
Pten Protein Function. Cell. 2014; 157:595–610. [PubMed: 24766807]
Pavlova NN, Thompson CB. The Emerging Hallmarks of Cancer Metabolism. Cell Metab. 2016;
23:27–47. [PubMed: 26771115]
Piskounova E, Agathocleous M, Murphy MM, Hu Z, Huddlestun SE, Zhao Z, Leitch AM, Johnson
TM, DeBerardinis RJ, Morrison SJ. Oxidative Stress Inhibits Distant Metastasis by Human
Melanoma Cells. Nature. 2015; 527:186–191. [PubMed: 26466563]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Vyas et al.

Page 19

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Porporato PE, Payen VL, Perez-Escuredo J, De Saedeleer CJ, Danhier P, Copetti T, Dhup S, Tardy M,
Vazeille T, Bouzin C, Feron O, Michiels C, Gallez B, Sonveaux P. A Mitochondrial Switch
Promotes Tumor Metastasis. Cell Rep. 2014; 8:754–766. [PubMed: 25066121]
Pyakurel A, Savoia C, Hess D, Scorrano L. Extracellular Regulated Kinase Phosphorylates Mitofusin 1
to Control Mitochondrial Morphology and Apoptosis. Mol Cell. 2015; 58:244–254. [PubMed:
25801171]
Pylayeva-Gupta Y, Grabocka E, Bar-Sagi D. Ras Oncogenes: Weaving a Tumorigenic Web. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2011; 11:761–774. [PubMed: 21993244]
Renault TT, Floros KV, Elkholi R, Corrigan KA, Kushnareva Y, Wieder SY, Lindtner C, Serasinghe
MN, Asciolla JJ, Buettner C, Newmeyer DD, Chipuk JE. Mitochondrial Shape Governs BaxInduced Membrane Permeabilization and Apoptosis. Mol Cell. 2015; 57:69–82. [PubMed:
25482509]
Sancho P, Burgos-Ramos E, Tavera A, Bou Kheir T, Jagust P, Schoenhals M, Barneda D, Sellers K,
Campos-Olivas R, Grana O, Viera CR, Yuneva M, Sainz B Jr, Heeschen C. Myc/Pgc-1alpha
Balance Determines the Metabolic Phenotype and Plasticity of Pancreatic Cancer Stem Cells. Cell
Metab. 2015; 22:590–605. [PubMed: 26365176]
Sarosiek KA, Chi X, Bachman JA, Sims JJ, Montero J, Patel L, Flanagan A, Andrews DW, Sorger P,
Letai A. Bid Preferentially Activates Bak While Bim Preferentially Activates Bax, Affecting
Chemotherapy Response. Mol Cell. 2013; 51:751–765. [PubMed: 24074954]
Schell JC, Olson KA, Jiang L, Hawkins AJ, Van Vranken JG, Xie J, Egnatchik RA, Earl EG,
DeBerardinis RJ, Rutter J. A Role for the Mitochondrial Pyruvate Carrier as a Repressor of the
Warburg Effect and Colon Cancer Cell Growth. Mol Cell. 2014; 56:400–413. [PubMed:
25458841]
Senft D, Ronai ZA. Regulators of Mitochondrial Dynamics in Cancer. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2016;
39:43–52. [PubMed: 26896558]
Serasinghe MN, Wieder SY, Renault TT, Elkholi R, Asciolla JJ, Yao JL, Jabado O, Hoehn K,
Kageyama Y, Sesaki H, Chipuk JE. Mitochondrial Division Is Requisite to Ras-Induced
Transformation and Targeted by Oncogenic Mapk Pathway Inhibitors. Mol Cell. 2015; 57:521–
536. [PubMed: 25658204]
Shadel GS, Horvath TL. Mitochondrial Ros Signaling in Organismal Homeostasis. Cell. 2015;
163:560–569. [PubMed: 26496603]
Stine ZE, Walton ZE, Altman BJ, Hsieh AL, Dang CV. Myc, Metabolism, and Cancer. Cancer Discov.
2015; 5:1024–1039. [PubMed: 26382145]
Sullivan LB, Chandel NS. Mitochondrial Reactive Oxygen Species and Cancer. Cancer Metab. 2014;
2:17. [PubMed: 25671107]
Sullivan LB, Gui DY, Hosios AM, Bush LN, Freinkman E, Vander Heiden MG. Supporting Aspartate
Biosynthesis Is an Essential Function of Respiration in Proliferating Cells. Cell. 2015; 162:552–
563. [PubMed: 26232225]
Sullivan LB, Martinez-Garcia E, Nguyen H, Mullen AR, Dufour E, Sudarshan S, Licht JD,
Deberardinis RJ, Chandel NS. The Proto-Oncometabolite Fumarate Binds Glutathione to Amplify
Ros-Dependent Signaling. Mol Cell. 2013; 51:236–248. [PubMed: 23747014]
Tan Z, Luo X, Xiao L, Tang M, Bode AM, Dong Z, Cao Y. The Role of Pgc1alpha in Cancer
Metabolism and Its Therapeutic Implications. Mol Cancer Ther. 2016; 15:774–782. [PubMed:
27197257]
Tardito S, Oudin A, Ahmed SU, Fack F, Keunen O, Zheng L, Miletic H, Sakariassen PO, Weinstock A,
Wagner A, Lindsay SL, Hock AK, Barnett SC, Ruppin E, Morkve SH, Lund-Johansen M,
Chalmers AJ, Bjerkvig R, Niclou SP, Gottlieb E. Glutamine Synthetase Activity Fuels Nucleotide
Biosynthesis and Supports Growth of Glutamine-Restricted Glioblastoma. Nat Cell Biol. 2015;
17:1556–1568. [PubMed: 26595383]
Toyama EQ, Herzig S, Courchet J, Lewis TL Jr, Loson OC, Hellberg K, Young NP, Chen H, Polleux F,
Chan DC, Shaw RJ. Metabolism. Amp-Activated Protein Kinase Mediates Mitochondrial Fission
in Response to Energy Stress. Science. 2016; 351:275–281. [PubMed: 26816379]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Vyas et al.

Page 20

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Vacanti NM, Divakaruni AS, Green CR, Parker SJ, Henry RR, Ciaraldi TP, Murphy AN, Metallo CM.
Regulation of Substrate Utilization by the Mitochondrial Pyruvate Carrier. Mol Cell. 2014;
56:425–435. [PubMed: 25458843]
van Gisbergen MW, Voets AM, Starmans MH, de Coo IF, Yadak R, Hoffmann RF, Boutros PC, Smeets
HJ, Dubois L, Lambin P. How Do Changes in the Mtdna and Mitochondrial Dysfunction Influence
Cancer and Cancer Therapy? Challenges, Opportunities and Models. Mutat Res Rev Mutat Res.
2015; 764:16–30. [PubMed: 26041263]
Vaseva AV, Moll UM. The Mitochondrial P53 Pathway. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009; 1787:414–420.
[PubMed: 19007744]
Viale A, Pettazzoni P, Lyssiotis CA, Ying H, Sanchez N, Marchesini M, Carugo A, Green T, Seth S,
Giuliani V, Kost-Alimova M, Muller F, Colla S, Nezi L, Genovese G, Deem AK, Kapoor A, Yao
W, Brunetto E, Kang Y, Yuan M, Asara JM, Wang YA, Heffernan TP, Kimmelman AC, Wang H,
Fleming JB, Cantley LC, DePinho RA, Draetta GF. Oncogene Ablation-Resistant Pancreatic
Cancer Cells Depend on Mitochondrial Function. Nature. 2014; 514:628–632. [PubMed:
25119024]
von Eyss B, Jaenicke LA, Kortlever RM, Royla N, Wiese KE, Letschert S, McDuffus LA, Sauer M,
Rosenwald A, Evan GI, Kempa S, Eilers M. A Myc-Driven Change in Mitochondrial Dynamics
Limits Yap/Taz Function in Mammary Epithelial Cells and Breast Cancer. Cancer Cell. 2015;
28:743–757. [PubMed: 26678338]
Vyas S, Chang P. New Parp Targets for Cancer Therapy. Nat Rev Cancer. 2014; 14:502–509.
[PubMed: 24898058]
Wang P, Song M, Zeng ZL, Zhu CF, Lu WH, Yang J, Ma MZ, Huang AM, Hu Y, Huang P.
Identification of Ndufaf1 in Mediating K-Ras Induced Mitochondrial Dysfunction by a Proteomic
Screening Approach. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:3947–3962. [PubMed: 25714130]
Warburg O. On the Origin of Cancer Cells. Science. 1956; 123:309–314. [PubMed: 13298683]
Ward PS, Patel J, Wise DR, Abdel-Wahab O, Bennett BD, Coller HA, Cross JR, Fantin VR, Hedvat
CV, Perl AE, Rabinowitz JD, Carroll M, Su SM, Sharp KA, Levine RL, Thompson CB. The
Common Feature of Leukemia-Associated Idh1 and Idh2 Mutations Is a Neomorphic Enzyme
Activity Converting Alpha-Ketoglutarate to 2-Hydroxyglutarate. Cancer Cell. 2010; 17:225–234.
[PubMed: 20171147]
Weinhouse S. On Respiratory Impairment in Cancer Cells. Science. 1956; 124:267–269. [PubMed:
13351638]
Wellen KE, Hatzivassiliou G, Sachdeva UM, Bui TV, Cross JR, Thompson CB. Atp-Citrate Lyase
Links Cellular Metabolism to Histone Acetylation. Science. 2009; 324:1076–1080. [PubMed:
19461003]
Yang C, Ko B, Hensley CT, Jiang L, Wasti AT, Kim J, Sudderth J, Calvaruso MA, Lumata L, Mitsche
M, Rutter J, Merritt ME, DeBerardinis RJ. Glutamine Oxidation Maintains the Tca Cycle and Cell
Survival During Impaired Mitochondrial Pyruvate Transport. Mol Cell. 2014; 56:414–424.
[PubMed: 25458842]
Ye J, Fan J, Venneti S, Wan YW, Pawel BR, Zhang J, Finley LW, Lu C, Lindsten T, Cross JR, Qing G,
Liu Z, Simon MC, Rabinowitz JD, Thompson CB. Serine Catabolism Regulates Mitochondrial
Redox Control During Hypoxia. Cancer Discov. 2014; 4:1406–1417. [PubMed: 25186948]
Zhang H, Gao P, Fukuda R, Kumar G, Krishnamachary B, Zeller KI, Dang CV, Semenza GL. Hif-1
Inhibits Mitochondrial Biogenesis and Cellular Respiration in Vhl-Deficient Renal Cell Carcinoma
by Repression of C-Myc Activity. Cancer Cell. 2007; 11:407–420. [PubMed: 17482131]

Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Vyas et al.

Page 21

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Mitochondria and Cancer

The role of mitochondrial metabolism, bioenergetics, mtDNA, oxidative stress regulation,
fission and fusion dynamics, cell death regulation, biogenesis and turnover and signaling in
tumorigenesis.

Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Vyas et al.

Page 22

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 2. Mitochondria and stages of tumorigenesis

Author Manuscript

Mitochondrial biology supports tumorigenesis at multiple stages. Mutations in
mitochondrial enzymes generate oncometabolites that result in tumor initiation.
Mitochondrial metabolic reprogramming, oxidative signaling and signaling can promote
tumor growth and survival. Mitochondria additionally regulate redox homeostasis,
susceptibility to cell death via alterations in morphology to promote cell survival. Alterations
in mitochondrial mass via regulation of biogenesis and mitophagy also contribute to survival
depending on cancer type. Mitochondrial metabolic reprogramming, biogenesis, redox
homeostasis and dynamics also contribute to metastatic potential of cancer cells.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

Vyas et al.

Page 23

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3. Effects of classical oncogenic and tumor suppressive pathways on mitochondrial
biology

Author Manuscript

Key mechanisms of mitochondrial regulation by c-MYC, K-RAS, PI3K and p53 signaling
pathways. Through transcriptional regulation, c-Myc induces mitochondrial biogenesis and
metabolism in addition to its stimulation of cell cycle progression and glycolysis. c-Myc
promotes mitochondrial fusion and respiration, which can result in increased ROS
production and oxidative signaling. Hyperactive PI3K signaling through either PI3K
mutation or loss/mutatoin of the PTEN tumor suppressor results in mTOR activation, which
is additionally regulated by nutrient availability, to regulate cell growth. mTOR promotes
mitochondrial biogenesis both transcriptionally and translationally. Low nutrient conditions
that result in a high AMP/ATP ratio result in AMPK activation, which opposes the mTOR
pathway. During chronic nutrient deprivation, AMPK can also promote mitochondrial
biogenesis to allow for metabolic flexibility. Loss of p53 promotes survival not only via
transcriptional regulation of cell death programs but also through direct interactions with
Bcl-2 proteins at the mitochondria. p53 can also induce mitochondrial respiration to promote
tumorigenesis by allowing for metabolic flexibility. Oncogenic K-Ras mutations result in a
coordinated program of mitochondrial regulation, inhibiting respiration through multiple
mechanisms as well as promoting mitochondrial fission and mitophagy.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 28.

