723

Endocrine and Targeted Manipulation of Breast Cancer:
Proceedings of the Sixth Cambridge Conference
Supplement to Cancer

Current NCI-sponsored Cooperative Group Trials of
Endocrine Therapies in Breast Cancer
Jennifer Eng-Wong, MD, MPH1
Jo Anne Zujewski, MD 2

Over several decades, investigators working through National Cancer Institutesponsored Cooperative Groups have contributed to major advances in the endocrine treatment of breast cancer. Accomplishments include the benefit of tamoxi-

Medical Oncology Branch, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, Maryland.

fen therapy for early stage invasive and noninvasive breast cancer, the benefit of

2

of tamoxifen after chemotherapy as opposed to concurrent administration, and

1

Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program, National
Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland.

raloxifene and tamoxifen for prevention of breast cancer, the improved efficacy
the ability of letrozole administered after 5 years of tamoxifen to improve disease-free survival. Most recently, Cooperative Group studies have contributed to
the development of a molecular profiling test, Oncotype Dx, which identifies
women who have an excellent prognosis with hormonal therapy alone. Ongoing
phase 3 clinical trials address the following questions:

 Is prolonged duration of aromatase inhibitor (AI) therapy beneficial?
 What is the efficacy and toxicity of steroidal versus nonsteroidal AIs in adjuvant treatment?

 Is combination hormonal therapy with an estrogen receptor down-regulator
(fulvestrant) and an AI superior to an AI alone in the treatment of metastatic
breast cancer?

 Does ovarian suppression offer superior benefit to standard therapy in the
treatment of premenopausal breast cancer?

 What is the role of chemotherapy for early stage breast cancer selected via molecular profiling analysis?
The authors would like to thank Dr. Jeff Abrams
for his editorial assistance.
Presented at Endocrine and Targeted Manipulation of Breast Cancer: Proceedings of the Sixth
Cambridge Conference, April 30–May 1, 2007,
Cambridge, Massachusetts.

 How can targeted therapies be used effectively in combination?
Studies in subsets of patients defined by molecular profiling will be necessary
to fully define breast cancer subtypes and realize the promise of personalized medicine. Close research partnerships that promote large-scale translational research
are essential to the continuation of rapid achievements in this field. Cancer
2008;112(3 suppl):723–9. Published 2007 by the American Cancer Society*

Address for reprints: Jennifer Eng-Wong, MD,
Lombardi Cancer Center, Georgetown University,
Washington, DC; Fax: (202) 444-2886; E-mail:
je95@georgetown.edu

KEYWORDS: breast cancer, endocrine therapy, clinical trial, hormone therapy,
aromatase inhibitor, tamoxifen.

Received July 30, 2007; revision received
September 20, 2007; accepted October 2, 2007.

N

*This is a US government work and, as such, is
in the public domain. Published 2008 by the
American Cancer Society.

ational Cancer Institute-sponsored Cooperative Group trials
nationally and internationally have evaluated endocrine therapy
in breast cancer during the past 3 decades. Significant achievements resulting from these trials by North American Cooperative
Groups are listed in Table 1. These efforts have helped to establish

Published 2007 by the American Cancer Society*
DOI 10.1002/cncr.23188
Published online 10 December 2007 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

724

CANCER Supplement

February 1, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 3

TABLE 1
Major Accomplishments by the North American Cooperative Groups in the Endocrine Treatment of Breast Cancer
Tamoxifen decreases the risk of invasive and non-invasive breast cancer28
Tamoxifen decreased the risk of ipsilateral and contralateral breast cancer in the treatment of DCIS29
Tamoxifen improves disease free survival in the treatment of early stage hormone receptor positive breast cancer30,31
Tamoxifen and radiotherapy combined is more effective than either tamoxifen or radiotherapy alone in the reducing ipsilateral breast tumor recurrences in women with node
negative tumors 1 cm32
Tamoxifen administered following adjuvant chemotherapy results in an improved disease free survival when compared with concurrent administration of chemotherapy and
tamoxifen33
Tamoxifen improves disease free survival when administered with chemotherapy and ovarian suppression in pre-menopausal women with breast cancer11
Aromatase inhibitors following 5 years of tamoxifen therapy in the adjuvant treatment of early stage breast cancer improve disease free survival34,35
Tamoxifen is not effective in the treatment of early stage, hormone receptor negative breast cancer36,37
Tamoxifen adjuvant therapy for 10 years is not superior to 5 years for women with lymph node negative estrogen receptor positive breast cancer1,38
Molecular profiling of hormonal receptor positive lymph node negative breast cancer is a validated prognostic marker and identifies women for whom chemotherapy provides
additional benefit19,20

tamoxifen initially, and more recently aromatase
inhibitor (AI) therapy, as effective treatments for
hormone receptor-positive invasive breast cancer. As
a result of these trials, important therapeutic gains
have occurred for women, and researchers have new
insights into the biology of breast cancer. In this
article, we will review the current phase 3 trials in
endocrine-responsive breast cancer that are being
conducted by the National Cancer Institute-sponsored Cooperative Groups, and we will examine the
questions being posed by the studies.

CURRENT NATIONAL CANCER INSTITUTE (NCI)
CANCER THERAPY EVALUATION PROGRAM (CTEP)
SPONSORED TRIALS
A list of ongoing US Cooperative Group trials is
shown in Table 2.

Duration of aromatase inhibitor therapy
The standard duration of tamoxifen therapy for early
stage breast cancer is 5 years.1,2 Although the selection of tamoxifen’s length of treatment is evidencebased, definitive studies of the length of aromatase
inhibitor (AI) therapy are lacking. The risk of breast
cancer recurrence is highest in the first few years after diagnosis, yet a significant number of relapses
occur well beyond 5 years,3 and strategies to combat
this residual risk are needed. In the MA-17 trial,
letrozole administered after tamoxifen was administered for 5 years improved disease-free survival and
demonstrated that hormonal therapy for longer than
5 years is beneficial.4 The hypothesis was that continued estrogen inhibition with an aromatase inhibitor administered for more than 5 years will be
effective in decreasing the risk of late recurrences,
and this is being tested in 2 trials. In the NCIC MA
17R trial, 1800 women who have finished approxi-

mately 5 years of tamoxifen followed by 5 years of an
aromatase inhibitor will be randomized to 5 more
years of letrozole versus placebo. The main question
in this trial is whether 10 years of letrozole is superior to 5 years of letrozole after the patient has
received 5 years of tamoxifen therapy. NSABP B-42
will randomize 3840 women who received a total of
5 years endocrine therapy (either AI or sequenced tamoxifen-AI) to placebo or letrozole for 5 years. This
trial tests whether additional AI therapy is beneficial
when a woman receives 2–3 years of initial therapy
with an AI. Both trials will report disease-free and
overall survival and will provide further information
on toxicity with prolonged use of AIs.

STEROIDAL VERSUS NONSTEROIDAL
AROMATASE INHIBITORS
Currently there are 3 third-generation AIs approved
by the US Food and Drug Administration. Two are
nonsteroidal, anastrozole and letrozole, and the third,
exemestane, is steroidal in conformation. All agents
are active in hormone receptor-positive breast cancer
and appear similar in their effects on aromatase inhibition and circulating estradiol levels,5 yet there is
preclinical and clinical evidence to suggest that they
may have different safety profiles, eg, exemestane
may exhibit more bone-sparing effects than the nonsteroidal AIs.6,7 Treatment effects of these 2 agents
are now being compared. The NCIC MA-27 trial will
randomize 6830 postmenopausal women with
resected primary breast cancer to receive either anastrozole or exemestane (for 5 years) as adjuvant therapy for newly diagnosed breast cancer. Several
ancillary studies are included that evaluate effects on
bone density, mammographic density, and quality of
life.

Cooperative Group Endocrine Trials/Eng-Wong and Zujewski

725

TABLE 2
Phase 3 CTEP Sponsored Cooperative Group Clinical Trials in the Endocrine Treatment of Invasive Breast Cancer*

Phase

Setting

Protocol No.

Title

III

Preoperative

ACOSOG-Z1031

III

Adjuvant

IBCSG-24-02

III

Adjuvant

IBCSG-25-02

III

Adjuvant

JMA17

III

Adjuvant

NCIC-MA.27

III

Adjuvant

NSABP-B-42

III

Adjuvant

PACCT-1

III

Advanced
breast
cancer

CALGB-40302

III

Advanced
breast
cancer

CALGB-40503

III

Advanced
breast
cancer

S0226

A Randomized Phase III Trial Comparing 16 to 18
Weeks of Neoadjuvant Exemestane (25 mg daily),
Letrozole (2.5 mg), or Anastrozole (1 mg) in
Postmenopausal Women with Clinical Stage II
and III Estrogen Receptor Positive Breast Cancer
A Phase III Trial Evaluating the Role of Ovarian
Function Suppression and the Role of
Exemestane as Adjuvant Therapies for
Premenopausal Women with Endocrine
Responsive Breast Cancer (SOFT)
A Phase III Trial Evaluating the Role of Exemestane
Plus GnRH Analogue as Adjuvant Therapy for
Premenopausal Women with Endocrine
Responsive Breast Cancer (TEXT)
A Phase III Randomized Double Blind Study of
Letrozole Versus Placebo in Women with
Primary Breast Cancer Completing Five or More
Years of Adjuvant Tamoxifen (NCIC CTG MA.17)
A Randomized Phase III Trial of Exemestane Versus
Anastrozole in Postmenopausal Women with
Receptor Positive Primary Breast Cancer
A Clinical Trial to Determine the Efficacy of Five
Years of Letrozole Compared to Placebo in
Patients Completing Five Years of Hormonal
Therapy Consisting of an Aromatase Inhibitor
(AI) or Tamoxifen Followed by an AI in
Prolonging Disease-Free Survival in
Postmenopausal Women with Hormone
Receptor Positive Breast Cancer
Program for the Assessment of Clinical Cancer
Tests (PACCT-1): Trial Assigning Individualized
Options for Treatment: The TAILORx Trial
Endocrine Therapy with or without Inhibition of
EGF and HER2 Growth Factor Receptors: A
Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled
Phase III Trial of Fulvestrant with or without
Lapatinib (GW572016) for Postmenopausal
Women with Hormone Receptor Positive
Advanced Breast Cancer
Endocrine Therapy in Combination with Anti-VEGF
Therapy: A Randomized, Double-Blind, PlaceboControlled Phase III Trial of Endocrine Therapy
Alone or Endocrine Therapy Plus Bevacizumab
(NSC 704865; IND 7921) for Women with
Hormone Receptor-Positive Advanced Breast
Cancer
Phase III Randomized Trial of Anastrozole Versus
Anastrozole and Fulvestrant as First Line
Therapy for Post Menopausal Women with
Metastatic Breast Cancer

Organization
Name

Planned
Maximal
Total
Accrual

Protocol
Activation
Date

ACOSOG

375

1/9/2006

IBCSG

3000

8/4/2003

IBCSG

1845

8/4/2003

NCIC

4800

8/24/1998

NCIC

6840

6/30/2003

NSABP

3840

8/14/2006

ECOG

10046

4/7/2006

CALGB

324

9/15/2006

CALGB

640

7/5/2006

SWOG

690

4/1/2004

ACOSOG indicates American College of Surgeons Oncology Trials Group; IBCSG, International Breast Cancer Study Group; NCIC National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group; NSABP, National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project; ECOG, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group; CALGB, Cancer and Leukemia Group B; SWOG, Southwest Oncology Group.
* Additional information on http://www.clinicaltrials.gov or http://cancer.gov

726

CANCER Supplement

February 1, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 3

Preclinical models have foretold much of the story of
AIs in the treatment of early stage breast cancer. Dr.
Brodie has developed the ovariectomized nude
mouse with estrogen-dependent MCF-7 breast cancer cells that have undergone transfection with the
human aromatase gene to evaluate AI effects.8 In this
model, the combination of tamoxifen and either
nonsteroidal AI, anastrozole, or letrozole, had no
improved efficacy over tamoxifen alone9 and correctly predicted the result seen in the Arimidex or Tamoxifen Alone or in Combination (ATAC) trial.10
Most recently, this model has been used to evaluate
combinations versus sequencing of endocrine and
targeted therapies. In trial SO226, investigators are
asking if concurrent endocrine therapy with anastrozole and fulvestrant will improve time to tumor progression when compared with anastrozole alone in
the first-line treatment of metastatic breast cancer.
Women progressing on the anastrozole arm will then
receive fulvestrant. Objectives also include assessing
the response rate, the rate of stable disease at >24
weeks, and the overall survival for this cohort of
patients.

ers concluded, after more than 9 years of follow-up,
that cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and 5-flurouracil (CAF) followed by tamoxifen and goserelin for 5
years improved time to recurrence and disease-free
survival but not overall survival compared with CAF
and goserelin for 5 years. Also CAF and goserelin
did not improve any clinical endpoint compared
with CAF only. Two ongoing international studies
led by the International Breast Cancer Study Group
(IBCSG) and conducted with the North American
Cooperative Groups are addressing the role of combination endocrine therapy in this population. In
the Suppression of Ovarian Function Trial (SOFT),
premenopausal women with operable breast cancer
(accrual goal, N 5 3000) are randomized to 1 of 3
arms as follows: tamoxifen for 5 years, ovarian function suppression (OFS) and tamoxifen for 5 years, or
OFS and exemestane for 5 years. In the Tamoxifen
and Exemestane Trial (TEXT), 1845 women, stratified by receipt of chemotherapy, will be randomized
to either OFS and tamoxifen or OFS and exemestane
for 5 years.
At present, tamoxifen is considered standard endocrine therapy for premenopausal women with hormone receptor-positive breast cancer. AIs alone are
contraindicated in women with functioning ovaries,
as a decrease in estrogen production in the peripheral tissue will lead to an increase in estrogen production by the ovaries.12,13 When administering
tamoxifen to premenopausal women, it is important
to consider pharmacogenetic individual differences
that may be potentiated by concurrent medications,
as highlighted by Goetz et al.14 Women who are poor
tamoxifen metabolizers have lower endoxifen levels,
the active tamoxifen metabolite, and this may correlate with a worse clinical outcome.15 According to
Ingle et al., poor metabolism of tamoxifen may be
due to either a genetic variant (commonly
CYP2D6*4) or to the concurrent use of CYP2D6 inhibitors, such as serotonin reuptake inhibitors.16 Additional confirmatory studies of CYP2D6*4 are needed.
However, because tamoxifen therapy is standard, it is
prudent to avoid the concurrent use of CYP-inhibiting agents in these patients.

OVARIAN SUPPRESSION IN PREMENOPAUSAL WOMEN

MOLECULAR PROFILING FOR PATIENT SELECTION

The complexities of targeting the endocrine pathway
in premenopausal women are numerous and include
patient age, endocrine effects of chemotherapy, duration of therapy, and class of endocrine agent. Davidson et al.11 evaluated combination hormonal therapy
in premenopausal, lymph node-positive, and hormone receptor-positive patients, and these research-

Today, with recognition that breast cancer is a disease with multiple subtypes,17 there is an increased
need for determining appropriate therapy for patient
subsets to avoid both undertreatment and overtreatment of breast cancer. In fact, when breast cancer
researchers were recently polled on the most pressing needs in translational research, the first item on

Molecular correlates of endocrine response with
both nonsteroidal AIs as well as the steroidal AI are
being studied in ACOSOG-Z1031. In this study,
women with stage II or III breast cancer will receive
anastrozole, letrozole, or exemestane for up to
18 weeks before surgery. The primary objective is to
determine whether anastrozole, letrozole, or exemestane administered as neoadjuvant endocrine treatment for postmenopausal patients with stage II or
stage III estrogen receptor-positive (ER1) breast cancer is active enough to have 1 of the AIs considered
in a future study that will compare neoadjuvant
aromatase inhibitor treatment with neoadjuvant
chemotherapy. Tumor tissue will be evaluated by
microarray analyses to identify what molecular effects
each of these agents has and to potentially identify
markers of hormone response and resistance.

CONCURRENT VERSUS SEQUENTIAL
HORMONAL THERAPY

Cooperative Group Endocrine Trials/Eng-Wong and Zujewski

their list was to identify patients for whom chemotherapy is not necessary.18 Because of the well considered, prospective analysis of retrospectively
collected data, Paik et al. were able to identify a 21gene signature ‘‘recurrence score’’ (available as Oncotype DX) that correlated with prognosis in lymph
node-negative, estrogen receptor-positive patients
who received tamoxifen or placebo.19 The recurrence
score segments the population into low-risk, intermediate-risk, and high-risk groups for recurrence.
For example, a recurrence score of 10 (low risk) estimates the risk of recurrence to be 7% at 10 years,
whereas a recurrence score of 35 (high risk) estimates the risk of recurrence to be 25%. The Oncotype DX was then tested on subjects who had been
enrolled on NSABP B-20 and yielded compelling information on the benefit of chemotherapy or hormonal therapy.20 A second study conducted by Kaiser
Permanente in California confirmed the prognostic
value of this test for this subset of patients.21
Oncologists and patients struggle with the question of how much benefit chemotherapy must provide to justify the risk. This is difficult to determine.
In 1 study of patient preferences, most patients felt
that 6 months of combination chemotherapy was
worth a 5% greater chance of living 5 years.22 Many
physicians recommend chemotherapy for a diseasefree improvement of 4% or greater; conversely, if the
anticipated benefit is 1% or less, then one could
reasonably forego chemotherapy. The controversy
appears to occur in the population for whom the
predicted benefit is in the 2% to 4% range. In this
subset, oncologists often recommend chemotherapy
based on clinical risk factors, but results from the
NSABP trials illustrate that clinical risk assessments
are imperfect because women with even low risk can
have poor outcomes and high Oncotype DX scores.20
The Trial Assigning Individualized Options for Treatment (TAILORx) will prospectively address the question of chemotherapy benefit in a cohort of women
eligible for a study based upon a molecular profiling
tool. The Oncotype DX score is used to place women
in 1 of 3 groups as follows: 1) recurrence score 10
cohort treated with adjuvant endocrine therapy only,
2) recurrence score 11–25 primary study group with
randomization to endocrine therapy versus chemotherapy and endocrine therapy, and 3) recurrence
score >25 cohort treated with chemotherapy and endocrine therapy. Tamoxifen, AIs, or a combination of
endocrine agents can be used as endocrine therapy
in any group at the investigator’s discretion. The goal
of this trial is to determine whether there is a subset
of women in whom chemotherapy can be avoided.
Furthermore, the TAILORx trial will include tissue

727

banking, which will be a rich source for future
studies.

STRATEGIES FOR COMBINED TARGETED THERAPY TO
OVERCOME ENDOCRINE RESISTANCE
Preclinical models have suggested that 1 mechanism
of endocrine resistance in breast cancer is activation
of alternate growth-factor pathways. This activation
may result in overexpression of human epidermal
growth-factor receptor—2 neu (HER-2 neu).8 Strategies to overcome endocrine resistance would involve
the use of agents directed against the activated
growth-factor pathway. Trastuzumab, which targets
against HER-2 neu, may be helpful in overcoming
endocrine resistance. The CALGB 40302 trial will
test the hypothesis that combined hormonal and
growth-factor therapy will be effective in treating
women with metastatic breast cancer who have progressed after endocrine therapy. Women who have
received prior endocrine therapy and who have any
degree of HER-2 neu expression (immunohistochemistry (IHC) 1, 2, or 31, or fluorescent in situ
hybridization (FISH) 1) will be randomized to fulvestrant and placebo versus fulvestrant and lapatinib, a dual-receptor, tyrosine-kinase inhibitor that
targets epidermal growth factor receptor-1 (EGFR-1)
and HER-2 neu. In addition to primary clinical endpoints, this study will include correlative studies of
tumor markers including HER-2 neu, ER, EGFR,
pAKT, and pERK1/2.
This Cooperative Group will also test the hypothesis that combining an angiogenesis agent with hormonal therapy will delay resistance and prolong
progression-free survival when added to first-line endocrine therapy for hormone receptor-positive metastatic breast cancer. Several lines of evidence suggest
that estrogen modulates angiogenesis through effects
on endothelial cells under both physiological and
pathological conditions.23 Estradiol significantly stimulates both growth rates and vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) production in MCF-7 cells.24,25
Preclinical data also suggest that tumor angiogenesis
may contribute to the development of endocrine
therapy resistance; after hormone ablation therapy,
angiogenesis recurs along with tumor regrowth after
initial vascular regression.26 In CALGB 40503,
patients receiving first-line hormonal therapy in the
metastatic setting will be randomized to endocrine
therapy in combination with bevacizumab (15 mg/kg
every 3 weeks) or hormonal therapy alone. Within
CALGB 40503, planned correlative science studies
include measurement of both circulating tumor cells
and circulating endothelial cells, molecular analysis

728

CANCER Supplement

February 1, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 3

of primary tumor specimens to distinguish luminal A
versus luminal B tumors, and exploratory pharmacogenomic and proteomic studies.

DISCUSSION
Past success in developing effective endocrine treatment for breast cancer have rendered the current
study of the disease more complex than it was in the
1990s. Most notably, the low, overall recurrence rate
in patients treated with adjuvant hormonal therapies
makes it more challenging to evaluate new
approaches. Thus, in traditional phase 3 trials that
enroll hormone receptor-positive patients, larger
study populations and longer follow-up times are
needed to answer questions on disease recurrence
and survival, the accepted clinical trial endpoints. To
further complicate matters, recent discoveries have
revealed that not all breast cancers are alike, even
within the subset recognized as hormone receptorpositive. The incorporation of molecular medicine
into the field of oncology highlights this paradigm
shift. The research community has responded to this
biologic insight by increasing its focus on trials limited to a specific subtype and by including planned
evaluations of tumor subtypes and their molecular
changes in response to therapy. On the positive side,
this approach has potential to truly identify who will
benefit from chemotherapy versus endocrine, biologic, and other therapies. The ability to spare women
unnecessary treatment and treatment-related side
effects is possible.
Clearly, breast cancer treatment is no longer
‘‘one size fits all.’’ To answer clinical questions in
subtypes of breast cancer, researchers need to enroll
subjects who meet more specific criteria relevant to
the precise question being asked. Attention will need
to be paid to how these subtypes of breast cancer
are defined. To accomplish these types of highly
informed trials, researchers must be willing to collaborate nationally and even internationally. Partnerships between trialists on approaches to tissue
collection, processing, testing, and data collection
will be imperative for success. With the advent of
tests like Oncotype Dx and Mammaprint,27 the era of
tailoring treatment to specific tumor signatures has
arrived, and tailored treatment is likely to become
increasingly sophisticated in coming years.
In addition, when designing new trials, we must
be cognizant of identifying cohorts with sufficiently
high event rates that the traditional endpoints are
still attainable in reasonable timeframes, or we must
find new intermediate endpoints that are reliable
surrogates for meaningful patient benefit. For exam-

ple, targeted therapies are less toxic than chemotherapy, yet they may not yield impressive tumor
response rates. How should we measure benefit for
such agents? Similarly, changes in tumor profiles that
signal resistance may precede clinical growth and
offer an opportune time to change treatment.
Although new biologic explanations for resistance to
endocrine therapies hold distinct promise for
improvement, the challenge during years to come is
to find innovative trial designs that enrich new
approaches for those patients most likely to benefit
from them and, at the same time, to eliminate the
majority of patients who have already been cured
with available treatments. Only in this way are we
likely to be able to conduct trials with a sample size
and within a timeframe that provide meaningful
results.

REFERENCES
1.

Fisher B, Dignam J, Bryant J, Wolmark N. Five versus more
than five years of tamoxifen for lymph node-negative
breast cancer: updated findings from the National Surgical
Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project B-14 randomized trial.
J Natl Cancer Inst. 2001;93:684–690.
2. NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology (Version
2.2007). Available from: http://www.nccn.org/physician_
gls/f_guidelines.html [Accessed May 7, 2007.]
3. Berry DA, Cirrincione C, Henderson IC, et al. Estrogen-receptor status and outcomes of modern chemotherapy for
patients with node-positive breast cancer. JAMA. 2006;295:
1658–1667. Erratum in: JAMA. 2006;295:2356.
4. Goss PE, Ingle JN, Martino S, et al. Randomized trial of
letrozole following tamoxifen as extended adjuvant therapy
in receptor-positive breast cancer: updated findings from
NCIC CTG MA.17. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2005;97:1262–1271.
5. Geisler J, Lonning PE. Endocrine effects of aromatase inhibitors and inactivators in vivo: review of data and method
limitations. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 2005;95:75–81.
6. Goss P, Thomsen T, Banke-Bochita J, Lowery C, D’Angelo P,
Asnis A. A randomized, placebo-controlled explorative
study to investigate the effect of low estrogen plasma levels
on markers of bone turnover in healthy postmenopausal
women during the 12-week treatment with exemestane or
letrozole #267 San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium.
Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2002;76(suppl 1):S76.
7. Goss PE, Qi S, Josse RG, et al. The steroidal aromatase inhibitor exemestane prevents bone loss in ovariectomized
rats. Bone. 2004;34:384–392.
8. Macedo LF, Sabnis G, Brodie A. Preclinical modeling of endocrine response and resistance: focus on aromatase inhibitors. Cancer 2008;112(3 suppl):681–690.
9. Lu Q, Liu Y, Long BJ, Grigoryev D, Gimbel M, Brodie A.
The effect of combining aromatase inhibitors with antiestrogens on tumor growth in a nude mouse model for
breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 1999;57:183–192.
10. Baum M, Buzdar A, Cuzick J, et al; andThe ATAC (Arimidex, Tamoxifen Alone or in Combination) Trialists’
Group. Anastrozole alone or in combination with tamoxifen versus tamoxifen alone for adjuvant treatment of postmenopausal women with early stage breast cancer: results

Cooperative Group Endocrine Trials/Eng-Wong and Zujewski

11.

12.

13.
14.

15.

16.
17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.
24.

25.

26.

of the ATAC (Arimidex, Tamoxifen Alone Or In Combination) trial efficacy and safety update analyses. Cancer.
2003;98:1802–1810.
Davidson NE, O’Neill AM, Vukov AM, et al. Chemoendocrine therapy for premenopausal women with axillary
lymph node-positive, steroid hormone receptor-positive
breast cancer: results from INT 0101 (E5188). J Clin Oncol.
2005;23:5973–5982.
Dowsett M, Haynes BP. Hormonal effects of aromatase
inhibitors: focus on premenopausal effects and interaction
with tamoxifen. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2003;86:255–263.
Dowsett M. Drug and hormone interactions of aromatase
inhibitors. Endocr Relat Cancer. 1999;6:181–185.
Goetz MP, Knox SK, Suman VJ, et al. The impact of cytochrome P450 2D6 metabolism in women receiving adjuvant tamoxifen. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2007;101:113–121.
Borges S, Desta Z, Li L, Skaar TC, Ward BA, Nguyen A.
Quantitative effect of CYP2D6 genotype and inhibitors on tamoxifen metabolism: implication for optimization of breast
cancer treatment. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2006;80:61–74.
Ingle JN. Pharmacogenomics of tamoxifen and aromatase
inhibitors. Cancer 2008;112(suppl 3):697–701.
Sorlie T, Perou CM, Tibshirani R, et al. Gene expression
patterns of breast carcinomas distinguish tumor subclasses
with clinical implications. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001;
98:10869–10874.
Dowsett M. The top ten research priorities in translational
research in breast cancer [website]. Available at: http://
www.toptenresearch.org. Accessed May 2, 2007.
Paik S, et al. A multigene assay to predict recurrence of tamoxifen-treated, node-negative breast cancer. N Engl J
Med. 2004;351:2817–2826.
Paik S, Tang G, Shak S, et al. Gene expression and benefit of
chemotherapy in women with node-negative, estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:3726–3734.
Habel LA, Shak S, Jacobs MK, et al. A population-based
study of tumor gene expression and risk of breast cancer
death among lymph node-negative patients. Breast Cancer
Res. 2006;8:R25.
Simes RJ, Coates AS. Patient preferences for adjuvant
chemotherapy of early breast cancer: how much benefit is
needed? J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr. 2001:146–152.
Losordo DW, Isner JM. Estrogen and angiogenesis: a
review. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2001;21:6–12.
Takei H, Lee ES, Jordan VC. In vitro regulation of vascular
endothelial growth factor by estrogens and antiestrogens in
estrogen-receptor positive breast cancer. Breast Cancer.
2002;9:39–42.
Ruohola JK, Valve EM, Karkkainen MJ, Joukov V, Alitalo K,
Harkonen PL. Vascular endothelial growth factors are differentially regulated by steroid hormones and antiestrogens
in breast cancer cells. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1999;149:29–40.
Jain RK, Safabakhsh N, Sckell A, et al. Endothelial cell
death, angiogenesis, and microvascular function after castration in an androgen-dependent tumor: role of vascular
endothelial growth factor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
1998;95:10820–10825.

729

27. Fan C, Oh DS, Wessels L, et al. Concordance among geneexpression-based predictors for breast cancer. N Engl J
Med. 2006;355:560–569.
28. Fisher B, Costantino JP, Wickerham DL, et al. Tamoxifen
for the prevention of breast cancer: current status of the
National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project P-1
study. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2005;97:1652–1662.
29. Fisher B, Dignam J, Wolmark N, et al. Tamoxifen in treatment of intraductal breast cancer: National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project B-24 randomised controlled
trial. Lancet. 1999;353:1993–2000.
30. Fisher B, Costantino J, Redmond C, et al. A randomized clinical trial evaluating tamoxifen in the treatment of patients
with node-negative breast cancer who have estrogen-receptor-positive tumors. N Engl J Med. 1989;320:479–484.
31. Fisher B, Redmond C. Systemic therapy in node-negative
patients: updated findings from NSABP clinical trials.
National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project. J Natl
Cancer Inst Monogr. 1992:105–116.
32. Fisher B, Bryant J, Dignam JJ, et al. Tamoxifen, radiation
therapy, or both for prevention of ipsilateral breast tumor
recurrence after lumpectomy in women with invasive
breast cancers of one centimeter or less. J Clin Oncol.
2002;20:4141–4149.
33. Albain K BW, O’Malley F, et al. Concurrent (CAFT) versus
sequential (CAF-T) chemohormonal therapy (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, 5-fluorouracil, tamoxifen) versus T
alone for postmenopausal, node-positive, estrogen (ER)
and/or progesterone (PgR) receptor-positive breast cancer:
mature outcomes and new biologic correlates on phase III
intergroup trial 0100 (SWOG-8814)[abstract]. Breast Cancer
Res Treat. 2004;88(suppl 1):A-37.
34. Goss PE, Ingle JN, Martino S, et al. A randomized trial of
letrozole in postmenopausal women after five years of tamoxifen therapy for early stage breast cancer. N Engl J
Med. 2003;349:1793–1802.
35. Mamounas E, Jeong JH, Wickerham L, et al. Benefit from
exemestane (EXE) as extended adjuvant therapy after five
years of tamoxifen (TAM): intent-to-treat analysis of NSABP
B-33. Presented at the 29th Annual San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium, December 14–17, 2006, San Antonio, Texas.
Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2006;100(suppl 1):S22.
36. Fisher B, Anderson S, Tan-Chiu E, et al. Tamoxifen and
chemotherapy for axillary node-negative, estrogen receptor-negative breast cancer: findings from National Surgical
Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project B-23. J Clin Oncol.
2001;19:931–942.
37. Hutchins LF, Green SJ, Ravdin PM, et al. Randomized,
controlled trial of cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and
fluorouracil versus cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and
fluorouracil with and without tamoxifen for high-risk, nodenegative breast cancer: treatment results of Intergroup Protocol INT-0102. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23:8313–8321.
38. Fisher B, Dignam J, Bryant J, et al. Five versus more than
five years of tamoxifen therapy for breast cancer patients
with negative lymph nodes and estrogen receptor-positive
tumors. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1996;88:1529–1542.

