Oncotarget, August, Vol.2, No 8

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Inhibition of Wnt signaling and cancer stem cells
Desheng Lu and Dennis A. Carson
Cancer stem cells represent a small number of pluripotent
and self-renewing cells within a tumor, which are resistant to
conventional chemotherapy and are responsible for tumor
initiation and maintenance. The Wnt/β-catenin signaling
pathway drives stem cell self-renewal and is involved in the
pathogenesis of various types of cancer. Aberrant activation of
the Wnt signaling pathway in normal stem cells can promote their
transformation into cancer stem cells [1,2]. Thus, drugs targeted
to the Wnt/β-catenin pathway may potentially be effective in
eliminating cancer stem cells. Recently, several small molecule
Wnt signaling inhibitors have been identified, that can have
therapeutic potential against cancers associated with aberrant
Wnt signaling [3]. However, most reported Wnt inhibitors are
still in the developmental stage, due to lack of specificity and
a poor understanding of their precise mechanisms of action.
Furthermore, there is limited evidence that these Wnt signaling
inhibitors can eradicate cancer stem cells, without depleting
normal stem cells in the bone marrow and the gastrointestinal
tract.
Salinomycin, an antibiotic potassium ionophore, is the
first drug reported to act as a selective breast cancer stem cell
inhibitor. It kills breast cancer stem cells at least 100 times more
effectively than paclitaxel in mice, but is relatively non-toxic
to normal stem cells [4]. The mechanism of salinomycin action
in the cancer stem cells remains unclear. Our recent studies
have shown that salinomycin potently inhibits proximal Wnt/
β-catenin signaling. It blocks the phosphorylation of the Wnt
co-receptor LRP6, and induces its degradation [5]. Considering
the importance of Wnt signaling in stem cell biology, the
Wnt antagonistic action of salinomycin may contribute to its
selective toxicity toward breast cancer stem cells. It will be
interesting to test whether other Wnt signaling inhibitors with
targets downstream of LRP6 are able to kill selectively breast
cancer stem cells.
A successful anticancer therapeutic regime should
eliminate both the differentiated cancer cells and the cancer
stem cell population. Classical cytotoxic agents may deplete
the bulk of a cancer but not the inherently chemo-resistant
cancer stem cells, which ultimately recur and metastasize. The
molecularly targeted agents act on aberrant molecular pathways
associated with tumor development and progression, and have
been successfully introduced to treat patients with various
cancers [6]. These drugs include Bcr-abl inhibitors, epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors, vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) antagonists, and recently Raf kinase
and Alk kinase inhibitors. These single-target agents have
spectacularly initial clinical efficacy when used alone, but none
are able to cure a cancer. Future experiments need to determine
if the combination of a single-target agent with salinomycin or
other Wnt signaling inhibitors might have the ability to induce
curative response in some tumors.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

University of California San Diego (UCSD) Moores Cancer
Center, La Jolla, CA 92093-0820, USA
Email: Desheng Lu. e-mail: delu@ucsd.edu
Received: August 18, 2011;
Published: August 21, 2011;

References
1.	 Nusse R. Wnt signaling and stem cell control. Cell Res.
2008; 18: 523-7.
2. 	 Reya T, Clevers H. Wnt signalling in stem cells and cancer.
Nature. 2005; 434: 843-50.
3. 	 Curtin JC, Lorenzi MV. Drug discovery approaches to
target Wnt signaling in cancer stem cells. Oncotarget.
2010; 1: 563-77.
4. 	 Gupta PB, Onder TT, Jiang G, Tao K, Kuperwasser C,
Weinberg RA, Lander ES. Identification of selective
inhibitors of cancer stem cells by high-throughput
screening. Cell. 2009; 138: 645-59.
5. 	 Lu D, Choi MY, Yu J, Castro JE, Kipps TJ, Carson DA.
Salinomycin inhibits Wnt signaling and selectively induces
apoptosis in chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2011.
6. 	 Aggarwal BB, Sethi G, Baladandayuthapani V, Krishnan
S, Shishodia S. Targeting cell signaling pathways for drug
discovery: an old lock needs a new key. J Cell Biochem.
2007; 102: 580-92.

587

Oncotarget 2011; 2: 587 - 587

