Original Article

Correlation of Drug-induced Apoptosis Assay Results
With Oncologist Treatment Decisions and Patient
Response and Survival
Linda D. Bosserman, MD1; Swapnil P. Rajurkar, MD1; Karl Rogers, MD2; Dirk C. Davidson, MD3;
Michael Chernick, PhD4; Allan Hallquist, MD5; Debbee Malouf1; and Cary A. Presant, MD1

BACKGROUND: An observational prospective nonblinded clinical trial was performed to determine the effect of a drug-induced apoptosis assay results on treatments planned by oncologists. METHODS: Purified cancer cells from patient biopsies were placed into the
MiCK (Microculture Kinetic) assay, a short-term culture, which determined the effects of single drugs or combinations of drugs on tumor cell apoptosis. An oncologist received the assay results before finalizing the treatment plan. Use of the MiCK assay was evaluated
and correlated with patient outcomes. RESULTS: Forty-four patients with successful MiCK assays from breast cancer (n ¼ 16), nonsmall cell lung cancer (n ¼ 6), non-Hodgkin lymphoma (n ¼ 4), and others were evaluated. Four patients received adjuvant chemotherapy after MiCK, and 40 received palliative chemotherapy with a median line of therapy of 2. Oncologists used the MiCK assay to
determine chemotherapy (users) in 28 (64%) and did not (nonusers) in 16 patients (36%). In users receiving palliative chemotherapy,
complete plus partial response rate was 44%, compared with 6.7% in nonusers (P < .02). The median overall survival was 10.1 months
in users versus 4.1 months in nonusers (P ¼ .02). Relapse-free interval was 8.6 months in users versus 4.0 months in nonusers (P <
.01). CONCLUSIONS: MiCK assay results are frequently used by oncologists. Outcomes appear to be statistically superior when oncologists use chemotherapy based on MiCK assay results compared with when they do not use the assay results. When available to oncoC 2012 American Cancer Society.
logists, MiCK assay results help to determine patient treatment plans. Cancer 2012;118:4877-83. V
KEYWORDS: chemosensitivity, apoptosis, breast cancer, drug assay, survival, response rate, relapse-free interval, clinical utility.

INTRODUCTION
Physicians have increased the use of predictive bioassays in cancer patients to personalize therapy and improve outcomes.
Although prior chemoresistance assays have been developed to try to individualize the choice of cytotoxic chemotherapy,
their application has been of limited usefulness.1 Despite this, some institutions are using these tests in patients, although
guidelines have not recommended such testing.2
A novel drug-induced apoptosis assay, the MiCK (Microculture Kinetic) assay, has been developed3 and tested with
success in acute myelocytic leukemia.4,5 The basis of this assay is the ability of a drug to rapidly induce apoptosis in cancer
cells in short-term culture (48 hours) without a need for tumor cell growth. In addition to testing in acute myelocytic
leukemia, it has been undergoing testing in solid tumors, including breast cancer,6 endometrial cancer,7 lung cancer,
miscellaneous solid tumors, and hematologic malignancies.
A large validation study has been completed (Salom et al, unpublished data). These results, presented at the American Society of Clinical Oncology in 2010,8 indicated a correlation between the use of the best chemotherapy based on the
MiCK assay and patient outcomes. Use of the chemotherapy that was best in the MiCK assay produced longer survival
and longer relapse-free intervals. Furthermore, physician use of chemotherapy that had significant apoptosis in the MiCK
assay produced higher response rates.
This initial observational nonrandomized, multi-institutional prospective trial was conducted to determine how
often physicians would use the results of the MiCK assay when the physicians knew the results of the assay before planning
and initiating chemotherapy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
It is of note that >10 years elapsed between initial development of the assay and initiation of this trial. This was because of
acquisition of the technology by DiaTech Oncology from Vanderbilt University, and moving the laboratory to the McGill
Corresponding author: Linda D. Bosserman, MD, Wilshire Oncology Medical Group–US Oncology, 1502 Arrow Highway, La Verne, CA 91750; Fax: (909) 593-5588;
Linda.bosserman@womgi.com
1
Wilshire Oncology Medical Group–US Oncology, La Verne, California; 2Nashville Oncology Associates, Nashville, Tennessee; 3Tennessee Plateau Oncology, Crossville, Tennessee; 4Lankenau Institute of Medicine, Wynnewood, Pennsylvania; 5DiaTech Oncology, Montreal, Quebec, CanadaE

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.27444, Received: September 15, 2011; Revised: November 21, 2011; Accepted: December 12, 2011, Published online February 21, 2012 in
Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

October 1, 2012

4877

Original Article

University campus in Montreal, Canada. Quality control
standards were implemented in Montreal, and the laboratory was approved by College of American Pathologists
and Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments
before initiation of the trial.
Patients with cancer of any stage, primary or recurrent,
were eligible. Sterile tumor specimens with as much as
1.0 cm3of viable tumor tissue, 1000 mL of malignant effusions, or 5 mL of leukemic bone marrow aspirate were placed
in sterile RPMI, and sent via overnight delivery on cool packs
to the DiaTech Oncology laboratory in Montreal.
Tumor Cell Purification

Within 24 to 48 hours of collection, the specimen was
minced, digested with 0.25 % trypsin and 0.08% DNase
for 1 to 2 hours at 37 C, and then filtered through a 100lm cell strainer. When necessary, nonviable cells were
removed by density gradient centrifugation. The cell suspension was then incubated for 30 minutes at 37 C in a
tissue culture flask to remove macrophages by adherence.
For epithelial tumors, lymphocytes were removed by 30minute incubation with CD2 antibody-conjugated magnetic beads for T lymphocytes and CD19 antibody-conjugated magnetic beads for B lymphocytes. Remaining
macrophages were removed, if necessary, using CD14
antibody-conjugated magnetic beads. The final cell
suspension was plated into a 96-well half-area plate, with
one 120-lL aliquot per well. The plate was incubated
overnight at 37 C with 5% carbon dioxide humidified
atmosphere. To give adequate well-bottom coverage, 5 
104 to 1.5  105 cells were seeded per well, depending on
the cell volume.
Human JURL-MK2 chronic leukemia in a blast crisis cell line (DSMZ, Braunschweig, Germany) was used as
a positive control for MiCK assays performed with patient
tumor cells. RPMI-1640 medium without phenol red was
used for all cultures. It was supplemented with 10% fetal
bovine serum, 100 U/mL of penicillin, and 100 lg/mL of
streptomycin. Cell counts and viability were evaluated by
trypan blue dye exclusion.
Each tumor cell preparation, after purification of
contaminating and necrotic cells, was analyzed by a
pathologist using hematoxylin/eosin-stained cytospin
preparations to confirm the presence of malignancy cytologically. If an adequate number of cells were available,
immunocytochemical stains were also performed to better
characterize the tumor phenotype. All specimens achieved
at least 90% pure tumor cell content by visual estimation
by an experienced pathologist and 90% viability by trypan
blue exclusion.
4878

MiCK Assay for Apoptosis

The MiCK assay procedure was adapted from the method
described previously.3,4 After overnight incubation,
chemotherapy drugs were added to the wells of the 96well plate in 5-lL aliquots. The number of drugs or drug
combinations and the number of concentrations tested
depended on the number of viable malignant cells that
were isolated from the tumor specimen. The drug concentrations, determined by molarity, were those indicated by
the manufacturer as the desired blood level concentration
1 serial dilution if enough cells were available. After
drug addition, the plate was incubated for 30 minutes at
37 C into a 5% carbon dioxide humidified atmosphere
incubator. Each well was then overlaid with sterile mineral
oil, and the plate was placed into the incubator chamber
of a microplate spectrophotometric reader (BioTek,
Winooski, Vt). The optical density at 600 nanometers
was read and recorded every 5 minutes over a period of
48 hours. Optical density increases, which correlate with
apoptosis, were converted to kinetic units (KU) of apoptosis by the proprietary software ProApo with a formula
described previously3,4 and were correlated with patient
outcomes. Active apoptosis was indicated as >1.0 KU. A
drug producing 1 KU was described as inactive, or it
was determined that the tumor was resistant to that drug
based on previous laboratory correlations of KU with
other markers of drug-induced cytotoxicity (growth in
culture, thymidine uptake).
Treatment of Patients

This study was a prospective multi-institutional nonblinded trial. MiCK assay results obtained before any
therapy was initiated were always transmitted to physicians. Physicians treated patients with the physicians’ own
choice of drugs as they deemed clinically indicated and
were free to use or not use any of the data from the MiCK
assay. Tumor responses were measured by Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors. Patients were evaluated
for time to recurrence after assay and survival after assay.
There were no rules or directions regarding how to
use the MiCK assay results. The study evaluated whether
the oncologist used the results of the assay, other data
were also used (eg, estrogen receptor analysis or human
epidermal growth receptor 2 [HER2] test results, or addition of other drugs), or the assay results were not used.
Because instructions or rules regarding using the assay
were not given, it was felt that this was a more valid test of
how the assay would be used in actual practice, where
oncologist have complete discretion in treatment
planning.
Cancer

October 1, 2012

MiCK Drug-Induced Apoptosis Assay/Bosserman et al

Table 1. Patient Characteristics

Table 2. Patterns of MiCK Assay Use

Characteristic

Value

Number of Patients
Age, mean y
Female sex

44
65.1
29

Tumor types
Breast
Nonsmall cell lung
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Pancreas
Ovary
Skin
Other
Performance status (ECOG mean)

16
6
4
3
2
3
10
1.3

Line of therapy
Adjuvant
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th or higher

4
16
9
5
1
5

Abbreviation: ECOG, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group.

Statistical Evaluation

The primary goals of the study were to identify how frequently physicians used the MiCK assay results to help
determine patient treatment, and to correlate use of the
MiCK assay with response rate, relapse-free interval, and
overall survival. Physicians completed questionnaires in
which they described what the intended treatment was
before the assay data were returned, what treatment was
used after the assay was reported, and whether the assay
was used in formulating the final treatment given to the
patient. Data were imported into SAS software (SAS Institute, Cary, NC) for analysis. If a sample had multiple
doses of the same drug, then the concentration with the
highest KU value was assigned to the drug. Nonparametric Kaplan-Meier product limit methods were used for
survival analysis and the analysis of relapse-free interval.9
In this analysis, the log-rank test was used to compare survival curves and the Wilcoxon test for comparing
medians.10 Response rates were compared using contingency tables and Fisher exact test.11
Investigational Review Board Approval

Investigators performed this trial after institutional review
board (IRB) approval was obtained from and monitored
by the Western IRB in Seattle, Washington. Each patient
had given voluntary informed consent in writing
before submission of tumor specimens for MiCK analysis.
The clinical trial was registered at clinicaltrials.gov
(NCT00901264).
Cancer

October 1, 2012

Physician used MiCK assay
Used
Used
Used
Used

only the assay results
the assay and other data
assay plus other drugs
the assay but modified due to organ function

Physician did not use the MiCK assay results
Patient preferred not to use drugs
Patient put on clinical trial
Physician just did not use results

28
18
8
9
2
16
7
1
8

RESULTS
The patient characteristics are described in Table 1. Mean
age was >65 years, and 29 patients were female. A variety
of tumors were studied, including breast (n ¼ 16), nonsmall cell lung cancer (n ¼ 6), non-Hodgkin lymphoma
(n ¼ 4), and others. Physicians most commonly entered
patients who were being considered for palliative chemotherapy. Only 4 patients were entered who were being
considered for adjuvant chemotherapy. The median line
of therapy planned to be used for palliative care after the
MiCK assay was second line, with a range of first-line
treatment up to eighth-line treatment. The median time
of follow-up for patients was 4.5 months (4.0 months in
patients whose physicians did not use the MiCK assay vs
5.6 months in patients whose physicians used the MiCK
assay to plan the treatments).
MiCK assay results were frequently used by physicians (Table 2); 64% of patients received chemotherapy
based at least in part on the MiCK assay, and in 18
(41%) treatment was based only on the MiCK assay. In
10 patients (23%), physicians used MiCK results but
also combined that information with other drugs not
tested in the assay, or modified the assay results based
on individual patient characteristics such as organ function and based on tumor biological characteristics. The
biological characteristics of these varied tumors were
considered by the oncologists in developing the final
treatment plans. For example, in breast cancer, hormone-receptor positive patients received hormonal
agents in addition to chemotherapy, and HER2-positive
patients received trastuzumab in addition to chemotherapy. Patients with nonsmall cell lung cancer who were
EGFR mutation-positive received erlotinib before consideration for performing the drug-induced apoptosis
assay. CD20-positive non-Hodgkin lymphoma patients
received rituximab in addition to chemotherapy. In 22
patients (50%), a change in chemotherapy resulted
from using the MiCK assay results.
4879

Original Article
Table 3. Correlation of Response With MiCK Assay Use

MiCK Assay Use

CR

PR

Stable

Progression

Physician used assay results
Physician did not use assay results

3
0

8
1

8
3

6
11

Abbreviations: CR, complete response; PR, partial response.

Although patients had signed consent to obtain the
assay, in 16 instances the physician did not use the assay
to determine patient treatment. In 1 instance, the patient
entered a clinical trial. After being advised of the assay
results and proposed treatment based on the assay, 7
patients preferred to be treated with another therapy (usually because of toxicity of the therapy identified as best in
the MiCK assay). In the other 8 patients, the physician
preferred to use another treatment based on literature or
the physician’s personal experience.
In breast cancer, the largest subset of patients
treated, 9 of 16 (56%) patients were treated based upon
the MiCK assay. In 3 of 9, the MiCK assay was used with
other nontested drugs, in 3 of 9 MiCK results were combined with targeted biotherapies, in 2 of 9 MiCK results
were combined with hormonal therapy, and in 1 of 9 only
the drugs active in the MiCK assay were used.

Figure 1. The overall survival of patients is shown. The red line
indicates patients whose therapy was based on using the
MiCK assay results. The blue line indicates patients whose
therapy was not based on using the MiCK assay results.
Crosshatching in curves indicates that patients were censored. Small numbers above the abscissa indicate patients at
risk at each time point. The curves are statistically different
by log-rank analysis (P ¼ .04).

Effect on Choices of Chemotherapy

In 16 patients (36%), oncologists changed from an
intended use of proprietary chemotherapy before knowledge of the MiCK assay to actual use of generic drugs after
assay results were reviewed. In 3 (7%) of patients, physicians changed from intended use of generic drugs to actual
use of proprietary drugs. In 9 patients (20%), physicians
used single-drug therapy after the MiCK assay, compared
with an intended use of combination therapy before
knowing MiCK assay results. In 4 patients (9%), oncologists used combination therapy after MiCK assay results,
compared with an intended use of single drugs before
knowledge of the MiCK assay results.
When physicians used the MiCK assay, they used a
chemotherapy that produced the highest KU value in 16
patients. Physicians used a treatment with a higher degree
of apoptosis (>2 KU) in 23 patients.
Effect on Patient Outcomes

In patients receiving palliative chemotherapy, complete
plus partial response rates were compared with the use or
nonuse of the MiCK assay (Table 3). If physicians used
the results of the MiCK assay, complete plus partial
response rate was 44%. This compared with only 6.7%
complete plus partial response rate if physicians did not
use the MiCK assay (P < .02).
4880

Overall survival was compared with use or nonuse
of the MiCK assay results (Fig. 1). If physicians used
the MiCK assay for determination of patient therapy, median overall survival was 10.1 months, compared with
only 4.1 months if physicians did not use MiCK assay
results (P ¼ .02).
The relapse-free interval in patients whose physicians used the MiCK assay to determine therapy was compared with those patients whose physicians did not use the
MiCK assay results (Fig. 2). The median relapse-free
interval was 8.6 months in patients whose physicians used
the MiCK assay, compared with 4.0 months in patients
whose physicians did not use the MiCK assay (P < .01).
To rule out the possibility that the addition of other
drugs to the chemotherapy selected based on the MiCK
assay was responsible for the advantages observed when
oncologists used the MiCK assay, we compared the results
of patients whose oncologists used only the MiCK assay
with the results of patients whose oncologists did not use
the MiCK assay. Complete and partial response rates were
higher in patients treated based only on the MiCK assay
(43.8%), compared with patients treated without the use
of the MiCK assay (6.7%, P ¼ .04). Overall survival was
longer in patients treated based only on the MiCK assay
Cancer

October 1, 2012

MiCK Drug-Induced Apoptosis Assay/Bosserman et al

Figure 2. Relapse-free interval in patients is shown. The red
line indicates patients whose therapy was based on using the
MiCK assay results. The blue line indicates patients whose
therapy was not based on using the MiCK assay results.
Crosshatching in curves indicates that patients were censored. Small numbers above the abscissa indicate patients at
risk at each time point. The curves are statistically different
by log-rank analysis (P < .01).

(median 10.1 months) compared with patients treated
without the use of the MiCK assay (median, 4.1 months;
P ¼ .02). The relapse-free interval was longer in patients
treated based only on the MiCK assay (median, 8.0
months) compared with patients treated without the use
of the MiCK assay (median, 4.0 months; P ¼ .03). Thus,
we conclude that the use of the MiCK assay (and not the
addition of other drugs) was associated with the improved
outcomes observed.
DISCUSSION
The issue of predictive testing for choosing chemotherapy
for cancer patients is of very high interest. The MiCK
assay is a nongenomic test that has demonstrated significant correlation with patient outcomes in ovarian cancer
and in acute myelocytic leukemia, and is a predictive test
that is currently undergoing additional prospective
national trials in other tumors. This study was developed
to determine whether and how physicians would use the
assay when seeing results before proceeding with
treatment.
This study was a nonrandomized trial, and therefore
is an observational study. In this prospective multi-institutional clinical trial, the MiCK assay was frequently used
by physicians to determine patient treatments. The 64%
rate of use of this predictive bioassay by oncologists to
design the chemotherapy treatment plan was considered
to be evidence of clinical utility (physicians will use the
results in patient care).
In many circumstances, physicians did not use the
assay because of patient preferences (usually to avoid toxCancer

October 1, 2012

icity of drugs with best results in the assay). In only 1
instance was a patient placed on a clinical trial instead of
using MiCK assay results. In patients in whom the physician elected not to use the assay results, oncologists just
preferred to use a chemotherapy they were more comfortable with, or decided to use targeted therapy not tested
in the assay based on other literature without patient bioassay results.
Because 8 of 28 patients whose physicians used the
MiCK assay results were treated in addition with other
drugs not tested in the assay (often biotherapy, targeted
therapy, and/or hormonal therapy), the MiCK assay alone
often will not determine a complete treatment plan. Other
biomarkers were easily integrated with the MiCK assay
results (especially estrogen receptors and HER2 analyses).
The oncologists considered the biological characteristics
of the tumors to guide treatment decisions in addition to
the MiCK assay results in 23% of patients.
Because of the heterogeneity of the tumors studied,
it is important that future studies be designed to compare,
disease by disease, outcomes of patients in whom MiCK
results were used, versus patients in whom MiCK results
were used with other biomarker-selected drugs, versus
patients in whom the MiCK assay was not used. In these
studies, stratification and/or analysis of the patients by
variables including histology, molecular analyses, and
extent of disease will be necessary to make the conclusions
more robust. Such studies are under way or being considered in UnitedHealthcare patients, and in centers such as
Walter Reed National Military Medical Center and
Vanderbilt Medical Center. Because this study was of a
limited size (44 patients), the studies in progress or in
development will add more patients with the same tumor
type, at the same stage, and receiving the same line of
therapy.
In 1 breast cancer patient whose results were important to note, the patient had received 8 prior lines of
chemotherapy before a MiCK assay was performed. The
physician had recommended hospice based on early progression on the last 2 lines of therapy and declining performance status. The patient and her husband initially
had declined hospice because she had done well years
earlier and they wanted to keep fighting. After the assay
was performed, results demonstrated a low amount of
apoptosis (0-1.5 KU) from 4 different drugs she had not
previously received. The physician discussed these results
with the patient and her family, which indicated only a
low chance of response based on the MiCK assay results,
and the likely associated toxicity with ineffective therapy.
With this additional knowledge, the patient elected to
4881

Original Article

receive hospice care and stated that her decision was
largely based on the low MiCK assay results. The MiCK
assay may therefore be able to reduce inappropriate use of
chemotherapy at the end of life and increase use of hospice
services.
This study did not correlate the numerical KU value
with results of therapy (response, duration of remission, or
survival). Such a correlation is necessary in future studies,
because it will be important to determine how high the KU
must be to have an association with best outcomes for the
individual patient. Larger studies of more homogeneous
patient populations (eg, only breast cancer receiving firstline therapy for recurrent disease) will answer this question
and define the optimal use of the assay. This study justifies
the need for such studies, which are in progress.
Although this study had a relatively low accrual, the
apparent overall survival and relapse-free interval were
statistically significantly longer in those patients whose
physicians’ management decisions were influenced by the
MiCK assay. However, this initial study should be confirmed in larger subsequent trials. There could be many
different reasons why an oncologist decided not to use the
test (eg, patient declined the therapy, oncologists were not
convinced of the improvement in outcomes if the results
were used, the physician preferred another treatment
based on clinical experience). Also, this was not a randomized study, and larger prospective randomized trials will
help establish the magnitude of the improvement with use
of the assay and correlation with actual KU values. The
positive results in this trial are important because they
serve as a rationale for conducting subsequent trials.
Despite the size of the study, the results indicate that
not only are oncologists willing to use the results of the
assay, but when they do, outcomes are likely to be superior
to results when physicians do not use the assay. The magnitude of the improvement in these patients was large
enough to be statistically significant.
This finding of improved outcomes may also reduce
costs of care by avoiding use of less effective treatments. The
observation that physicians often used less costly generic
drugs may be important to oncologists by suggesting when
generic drugs might be at least as useful as proprietary drugs.
A modeling study of claims data from a large self-insured
employer’s database has indicated that savings would have
been likely if the MiCK assay had been used to select therapy.12 Although it is anticipated that use of inpatient hospital care, supportive care measures, and laboratory and
radiologic evaluations could be reduced by use of the MiCK
assay (because of longer and better disease control), this
study did not address those variables. Such variables are
4882

being evaluated in future clinical utility trials (eg, a national
utility trial underway in UnitedHealthcare patients). Future
larger studies will examine, disease by disease, net cost savings for chemotherapy expenses and overall costs of care
more comprehensively and interpret such results versus
overall outcomes (relapse-free interval and overall survival).
Such studies will also examine subsequent drug utilization
to determine whether single-agent or generic drug use based
on the MiCK assay actually replaces combination drug therapy and/or proprietary drug use, or simply delays it to a later
line of therapy.
This is the first utility study to follow up on the prior
trials of validity of the MiCK assay in ovarian cancer and
acute myelocytic leukemia. Although all of the validation
and utility trials have been prospective and multi-institutional, the validation trials were blinded so that the investigator never knew the MiCK assay results. This utility
study was nonblinded, so that the oncologist received,
within 72 hours of biopsy, the drug-induced apoptosis
results and a laboratory interpretation of which therapies
were best in vitro, and the actual KU of apoptosis for each
single drug or combination tested. Although the outcomes were statistically significantly improved if the assay
results were used by the oncologist, and although the
results indicate that physicians will frequently use the
assay results, larger correlative analyses will be able to
determine which disease types and which lines of therapy
are most impacted by use of the MiCK assay.
The strengths of this study are that the trial was prospective and multi-institutional, and it compared physician use with the important clinical outcomes of tumor
response, relapse-free interval from time of assay, and
overall survival. In addition, it was used on nonselected
patients seen in community settings. The laboratory analyses were performed at some distance from the clinical
sites (Montreal laboratory, clinical sites in Tennessee and
Los Angeles), indicating applicability of the assay to all
patients in the United States and Canada.
The weaknesses of the study are that it was small (44
patients), the sample of patients consisted of a heterogeneous group with different diagnoses and different lines of
therapy, and the study was not randomized. Therefore,
this study could not make individual conclusions about
which diseases were most influenced by availability of the
MiCK assay results. The study showed conclusively that
overall the assay would be used in oncology patients, but
hypothesis-generating for the questions as to whether the
results are useful in adjuvant versus first-line versus laterline therapy, which type of cancer or leukemia is best
impacted by the use of the assay, whether use of the assay
Cancer

October 1, 2012

MiCK Drug-Induced Apoptosis Assay/Bosserman et al

alone or together with other nontested drugs is best, and
whether there is an overall savings in health care costs by
use of the assay. The results of this trial will help determine the anticipated benefits of assay use in future
randomized trials, thus helping to determine the parameters and sample size required for high statistical power
in such trials.
However, oncologists are frequently challenged by
the need to make a choice about which therapy is best for
an individual patient. Although molecular biomarker
studies are widely viewed as an important aid in making
such decisions,13-15 this study suggests that the MiCK
assay may also be helpful to oncologists faced with making
treatment decisions, and may be useful together with
molecular results in the future. A trial is currently in development to integrate and correlate molecular and apoptosis
assay results.
Because fresh tissue is needed for the MiCK assay, as
well as for many other biomarker assays,16 not all patients
at each line of therapy will have sufficient tissue available
for analysis. Although currently the assay can be performed with excisional and incisional surgical biopsies (as
well as with malignant effusions, bone marrow, and blood
with adequate number of circulating leukemia or other
neoplastic cells) and also with core needle biopsies, in the
future, use of this assay might be more generally helpful if
fine needle biopsies could be used. Studies are under way
to develop such technology.
On the basis of this small multicenter trial, we conclude that when physicians are informed of the MiCK assay
results, they frequently use the results to plan patient treatments. When physicians use the results, patient outcomes
appear to be better. Continued collection of data on use of
the MiCK assay and clinical outcomes will further define
the clinical settings in which the assay is most helpful.
FUNDING SOURCES
Supported by DiaTech Oncology, Nashville, Tennessee.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
A.H. is employed by DiaTech Oncology. M.C. and C.A.P. are
paid consultants of DiaTech Oncology. C.A.P. serves as Director

Cancer

October 1, 2012

of Medical Oncology for DiaTech Oncology. A.H. and C.A.P.
have stock options in DiaTech Oncology. Wilshire Oncology
Medical Group receives direct research grant funding from DiaTech Oncology (L.D.B., S.P.R., and C.A.P. are employed by
Wilshire Oncology Medical Group but do not receive direct
research grant funding from DiaTech Oncology). D.C.D. and
K.R. receive research grant funding from DiaTech Oncology.

REFERENCES
1. Schrag D, Garewal HS, Burstein HJ, et al. American Society of
Clinical Oncology Technology Assessment: chemotherapy sensitivity
and resistance assays. J Clin Oncol. 2004;22:3631-3638.
2. NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology, Ovarian Cancer,
version 1.2011j. Available at: www.NCCN.org Accessed on December 12, 2010.
3. Kravtsov V, Fabian I. Automated monitoring of apoptosis in suspension cell cultures. Lab Invest. 1996;74:557-570.
4. Kravtsov V, Greer J, Whitlock J, Koury M. Use of the microculture
kinetic assay of apoptosis to determine chemosensitivities of leukemias. Blood. 1998;92:968-980.
5. Kravtsov V, Greer J, Shyr Y, et al. Prediction of survival in acute
nonlymphocytic leukemia. Blood. 2001;98:214b.
6. Whitworth PW, Presant CA, Rutledge J, et al. Chemosensitivity of
patient breast cancer cells in vitro: correlation with prior chemotherapy and implications for personalized treatment planning [abstract].
J Clin Oncol. 2009;27(suppl). Abstract e11563A.
7. Ballard KS, Homesley HD, Hodson C, et al. Endometrial carcinoma in-vitro chemosensitivity testing of single and combination
chemotherapy regimens using the novel microculture kinetic
(MiCK) apoptosis assay: implications for endometrial cancer treatment. J Gynecol Oncol. 2010;21:45-59.
8. Salom EM, Homesley HD, Presant CA, et al. Can we increase
response rate and overall survival by individualizing chemotherapy
in ovarian cancer—the role of new chemotherapy induced apoptosis
assay [abstract]. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28(suppl 15s). Abstract 5112.
9. Kaplan EL, Meier P. Nonparametric estimation from incomplete
observations. J Am Stat Assoc. 1958;53:457-481.
10. Peto R, Peto J. Asymptotically efficient rank invariant test procedures. J R Stat Soc. 1972;135:185-207.
11. Fisher RA. Statistical Methods for Research Workers. Edinburgh,
UK: Oliver and Boyd; 1954.
12. Latimer G, Presant CA, Hallquist A, et al. The value of personalized treatment planning: cost savings by the microculture kinetic
chemosensitivity assay, evidence from a large American self-insured
company [abstract]. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27(suppl). Abstract e17.
13. Von Hoff DD, Stephenson JJ Jr, Rosen P, et al. Pilot study using molecular profiling of patients’ tumors to find potential targets and select treatments for their refractory cancers. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28:4877-4883.
14. Doroshow JH. Selecting systemic cancer therapy 1 patient at a
time: is there a role for molecular profiling of individual patients
with advanced solid tumors? J Clin Oncol. 2010;28:4869-4871.
15. MacConaill LE, Garraway LA. Clinical implications of the cancer
genome. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28:5219-5228.
16. Hirsch FR, Wynes MW, Gandara DR, et al. The tissue is the issue:
personalized medicine for nonsmall cell lung cancer. Clin Cancer
Res. 2010;16:4909-4911.

4883

