Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 46

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Delayed reendothelialization with rapamycin is rescued by the
addition of nicorandil in balloon-injured rat carotid arteries
Ying Qian Zhang1, Feng Tian1,*, Jin Song Chen2,1, Yun Dai Chen1, Ying Zhou3,1,
Bo Li1, Qiang Ma1, Ying Zhang1
1

Department of Cardiology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China

2

Department of Cardiology, Chinese PLA 175th Hospital, Fujian, China

3

VIP Medical Service Department, Beijing Shijitan Hospital, Beijing, China

*

Co-first author of this article

Correspondence to: Yun Dai Chen, email: dryundaic@163.com, cyundai@vip.163.com
Keywords: nicorandil, rapamycin, xanthine oxidase, endothelium, angioplasty
Received: January 07, 2016     Accepted: September 24, 2016     Published: October 04, 2016

ABSTRACT
Rapamycin is an immunosuppressive agent that is added to drug eluting stents.
It prevents restenosis, but it also impairs reendothelialization. Nicorandil is a hybrid
agent with adenosine triphosphated (ATP)-sensitive K+ (KATP) channel opener and
nitrate properties. It prevents oxidative stress and cell apoptosis induced by rapamycin
in endothelial cells in vitro. However, whether nicorandil promotes reendothelialization
after angioplasty delayed by rapamycin remains to be determined. Balloon injury
model was established in SD rats. Nicorandil increased reendothelialization impaired
by rapamycin, and it decreased xanthine oxidase (XO)-generated reactive oxygen
species (ROS) induced by rapamycin. In addition, eNOS expression inhibited by
rapamycin was increased by nicorandil in vivo. In vitro, rapamycin-impeded cardiac
microvascular endothelial cells (CMECs) migration, proliferation and rapamycininduced ROS production were reversed by nicorandil. Knockdown of XO partially
inhibited rapamycin-induced ROS production and cell apoptosis in CMECs, and it
promoted CMECs migration and proliferation suppressed by rapamycin. Knockdown
of Akt partially prevents eNOS upregulation promoted by nicorandil. The beneficial
effect of nicorandil is exhibited by inhibiting XO and up-regulating Akt pathway.
Nicorandil combined with rapamycin in effect rescue the deficiencies of rapamycin
alone in arterial healing after angioplasty.

is a hybrid agent with adenosine triphosphated (ATP)sensitive K+ (KATP) channel opener and nitrate properties
[5]. Clinical studies find that nicorandil reduces the rate
of target vessel revascularization [6]. Preclinical studies
revealed that nicorandil attenuates endothelial VACM1 expression in diabetic rats [7], prevents rapamycininduced production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) [8],
promotes eNOS expression [9], and inhibits endothelial
cells apoptosis [10]. Nicorandil also increases endothelial
cells proliferation and migration [11]. Nicorandil may
promote early phase of reendothelialization that is delayed
by rapamycin.
ROS generated in coronary arteries impairs
reendothelialization [12]. Xanthine oxidase (XO) is
identified as a source of ROS in cardiac microvascular
endothelial cells (CMECs) [13], atherosclerosis [14]

INTRODUCTION
Drug eluting stents (DESs) are developed for
preventing restenosis after percutaneous coronary
intervention (PCI). However, clinical studies suggest that
DESs delay reendothelialization, and DESs appear to be
accompanied by a higher prevalence of stent thrombosis [1].
Rapamycin is an immunosuppressive agent that is added to
DESs. It inhibits vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation
and migration to prevent restenosis [2]. However, it also
induces autophagy and apoptosis in endothelial cells [3],
increases oxidative stress [4], and thus suppresses healing
of the endothelium [3].
Endothelial cells originating from intact adjacent
arterial segments populated the stent luminal surface as a
result of local proliferation and migration [1]. Nicorandil
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75926

Oncotarget

and coronary disease [15]. Rapamycin could directly
activate XO [16]. Nicorandil has been found to inhibit
XO activity in diabetic rats [17]. Thus, nicorandil may
promote reendothelialization by inhibiting XO-generated
ROS. eNOS is the dominant enzyme that contributes to
the production of nitric oxide (NO) in vessels [4], and
is an indicator of reendothelialization [18]. Rapamycin
inhibits eNOS expression in vitro [4], but nicorandil
promotes eNOS expression [9]. We build the hypothesis
that nicorandil may promote reendothelialization impaired
by rapamycin through inhibiting XO-generated ROS
formation and promoting eNOS expression. In vivo carotid
balloon injury model and in vitro CMECs were used to
indentify this hypothesis.

significantly decreased ROS production (p<0.01)
(Figure 2A and Figure 2B). To confirm the role of ROS
in rapamycin-impaired reendothelialization, NAC, a cell
permeable antioxidant was used as additional treatment.
NAC accelerated reendothelialization impaired by
rapamycin from 19.9±4.45% to 56.7±7.22% (p<0.01)
(Figure 2C and Figure 2D). PECAM-1 (CD31) positive
length in lumen surface and eNOS expression in carotid
arteries were also accelerated by NAC (Figure 2E and
Figure 2F), consistent with the results of Evans blue
staining.

RESULTS

We detected XO in carotid arteries of different
groups by western blotting. XO is activated in BI
group. Rapamycin increased XO protein level in injured
arteries. Co-treatment of nicorandil significantly inhibited
rapamycin-induced XO protein production (p<0.01)
(Figure 3A and Figure 3B). eNOS is an indicator of
reendothelialization [18]. We tested eNOS mRNA
expression by qRT-PCR. Rapamycin decreased eNOS
production 14 days after balloon injury. Nicorandil
reversed eNOS expression inhibited by rapamycin
(Figure 3C).

Nicorandil inhibits XO production and promotes
eNOS expression in carotid arteries

Nicorandil promotes delayed
reendothelialization induced by rapamycin
Reendothelialization was valued by Evans blue
staining and immunostaining of PECAM-1 (CD31).
14 days after balloon injury, 53.1±0.03% of the
injured lumen surface restored reendothelialization
in balloon injury (BI) group. Rapamycin impaired
reendothelialization. Nicorandil itself significantly
promoted reendothelialization. Co-treatment of nicorandil
promoted reendothelialization impaired by rapamycin
from 22.5±1.8% to 58.3±4.0% (p<0.01) (Figure 1A and
1B). PECAM-1(CD31) positive cells in lumen surface
showed a partial restoration of the endothelial cell
monolayer in BI group, and rapamycin decreased this
restoration. In contrast, the PECAM-1(CD31) positive
length in lumen surface was accelerated by co-treatment
of nicorandil (Figure 1C), consistent with the results
of Evans blue staining. The effects of nicorandil and
rapamycin on intimal hyperplasia were also evaluated.
14 days after balloon injury, intimal hyperplasia developed
in BI group, whereas it was suppressed in rapamycin
group (Figure 1D). Lumen area in rapamycin group
was larger than that in the BI group (8.82±0.711 vs.
5.34±0.354 × 104μm2, p<0.01) (Figure 1E), and intima to
media area ratio was significantly smaller than that in the
BI group (0.535±0.059 vs. 0.86±0.061, p<0.01) (Figure
1F). Co-treatment of nicorandil and rapamycin showed a
larger lumen area and a smaller intima to media area ratio
than the rapamycin group, but there were no statistically
significance (p>0.05).

Nicorandil prevents CMECs apoptosis induced
by rapamycin
Rapamycin induced cell apoptosis in primary
cultures of CMECs. Nicorandil reduced cell apoptosis
induced by rapamycin from 20.04±8.59% to 9.29±0.94%
(p<0.01) (Figure 4A and Figure 4B). Caspase 3 is an
essential enzyme regulating cell apoptosis. Rapamycin
increased caspase 3 activation in CMECs, and nicorandil
inhibited this caspase 3 activation (Figure 4C). Since XO
is activated in injured arteries, we tested the role of XO in
apoptosis. 48h post-XO siRNA transfection, XO protein
level was significantly decreased compared to cells treated
with negative control siRNA (Figure 4D and Figure 4E).
XO knockdown reduced cell apoptosis induced by
rapamycin (p<0.01) (Figure 4A and Figure 4B). In XOknockdown CMECs, caspase 3 activity increased by
rapamycin is also reduced (p<0.01) (Figure 4C).

Nicorandil inhibits ROS production in CMECs
Intracellular ROS was valued by flow cytometric
analyzing of DHE staining. Rapamycin increased
intracellular ROS production in CMECs by 4.85±0.64
folds compare with the control group. Nicorandil
decreased the ROS level to 2.46±0.37 folds of the control
group (Figure 5A and Figure 5B). To detect the role of
XO in ROS production in CMECs, XO was knockdown
by XO siRNA. XO knockdown significantly reduced

Nicorandil inhibits oxidative stress in carotid
arteries
We detected ROS production in carotid arteries
by DHE staining. BI group showed a high fluorescence
signal in intima area and rapamycin further increased
ROS production. However, co-treatment with nicorandil
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75927

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Nicorandil promotes reendothelialization impaired by rapamycin. A., SD rats received BI procedure were

randomized to vehicles, rapamycin, nicorandil or rapamycin-nicorandil co-treatment. Reendothelialization area is the area that does not
uptake Evans blue dye. B., Summary data for reendothelialization is expressed in percentage. Values are mean±SE. **p<0.01 vs. rapamycin
group. C., Immunostaining of PECAM-1 (CD31) in rats treated with vehicles, rapamycin, nicorandil or rapamycin-nicorandil co-treatment.
D., Cross sections of carotid arteries in different groups 14 days after BI. Sections were stained with H&E. E. Quantitative analysis of
lumen area. Bars represent means±SE. **p<0.01 vs. BI group. F. Quantitative analysis of intima to media area ratio. Bars represent
means±SE. **p<0.01 vs. BI group.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75928

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Nicorandil inhibits in situ oxidative stress. A., In situ detection of ROS production with DHE staining. B., Summery

data of DHE fluorescence in difference groups. Values are mean±SE. **p<0.01 vs. rapamycin group. C., Reendothelialization was valued
by Evans blue staining in each group. NAC (150mg/kg/day) was given by gavage feeding. D., Summary data for reendothelialization is
expressed in percentage. Values are mean±SE. **p<0.01 vs. rapamycin group. E., Immunostaining of PECAM-1 (CD31) in lumen surface.
F., eNOS expression in carotid arteries were analyzed by qRT-PCR. Values are mean±SE. **p<0.01 vs. rapamycin group.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75929

Oncotarget

Nicorandil activates Akt/eNOS in CMECs

rapamycin-induced ROS production (p<0.01) (Figure 5A
and Figure 5B).

PI3K/Akt
phosphorylation
increases
cell
proliferation [19], and it is upstream of eNOS [20]. We
tested Akt phosphorylation by western blotting. Expectedly,
phosphorylation of Akt was inhibited by 24h of rapamycin
incubation. Additional treatment of nicorandil promoted
Akt phosphorylation in CMECs (P<0.01) (Figure 7A and
Figure 7B). When Akt knockdown is achieved by Akt
siRNA transfection (Figure 7C and Figure 7D), eNOS
expression in CMECs induced by nicorandil is reduced
(P<0.01) (Figure 7E).

Nicorandil promotes CMECs proliferation and
migration
Cell migration back into the denuded area was
assessed after 24 h under varying conditions. Compared
with control groups, rapamycin delayed CMECs
migration. Co-treatment of nicorandil enhanced migration
of CMECs (P<0.01) (Figure 6A and Figure 6B). 24 h
rapamycin incubation also inhibited CMECs proliferation.
Co-treatment of nicorandil reversed rapamycin-impaired
proliferation and also increased cell viability (P<0.05)
(Figure 6C and Figure 6D). When XO knockdown was
achieved by XO siRNA transfection, CMECs migration
impaired by rapamycin was reversed by XO siRNA
(P<0.01) (Figure 6A and Figure 6B). Cell proliferation
prevented by rapamycin was also enhanced by XO siRNA
(P<0.05) (Figure 6C), however, cell viability reduced by
rapamycin was not increased by XO siRNA (Figure 6D).

DISCUSSION
The principle finding is that nicorandil promotes
rapamycin-impaired reendothelialization after balloon
injury in rats. The main mechanism is that nicorandil
decreases XO-produced ROS induced by rapamycin and
nicorandil enhances eNOS expression. We also demonstrate
that nicorandil enhances phosphorylation of Akt, promotes

Figure 3: Nicorandil inhibits XO production and promotes eNOS expression. A., Representative western blots for XO in

injured carotid arteries treated with or without rapamycin or nicorandil. B., Quantitative analysis of XO protein level. Values are mean±SE.
**p<0.01 vs. rapamycin group. C., eNOS expression in carotid arteries was analyzed by qRT-PCR. Values are mean±SE. **p<0.01 vs.
rapamycin group.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75930

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Nicorandil prevents CMECs apoptosis. A., CMECs were treated with rapamycin (100ng/ml) or nicorandil (100nM) for

24 h. XO is knockdown by XO siRNA. CMECs apoptosis was analyzed by Annexin V-FITC/PI staining and qualified by flow cytometry
(n=3). B., Summery data of percentage of apoptotic cells. Values are mean±SE. **p<0.01 vs. rapamycin group. C., Summery data of
caspase 3 activity in different groups. Values are mean±SE. **p<0.01 vs. rapamycin group. D., XO protein was valued by western blot.
CMECs were treated with negative control (NC) siRNA or XO siRNA (n=3). E., Summery data of relative XO protein in CMECs. Values
are mean±SE. **p<0.01 vs. NC siRNA group.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75931

Oncotarget

cell proliferation, increases cell migration, impedes
oxidative stress and prevents apoptosis in CMECs. The
beneficial effect of DESs on reducing restenosis is well
established [4], primarily by preventing vascular smooth
muscle cells (VSMCs) proliferation and migration.
Unfortunately, DESs delay reendothelialization, and
restoration of an intact endothelium is crucial for the
prevention of both restenosis and stent thrombosis [1].
Rapamycin prevents eNOS expression and promotes cell
apoptosis in RAECs [21], and it suppresses HUVECs
proliferation and migration [22]. Protecting endothelial
cells and accelerating reendothelialization after DESs
implantation is of great significance for clinical application.
Rapamycin itself does not impair the intact
endothelium without balloon injury (Supplementary
Material Figure S1A, Figure S1B). However, rapamycin
inhibited reendothelialization in balloon-injured carotid
arteries, which was significantly reversed by nicorandil.
Oxidative stress inhibits reendothelialization [12]. In the

present study, rapamycin augmented ROS production in
carotid arteries. Co-treatment of nicorandil abolished ROS
elevation. ROS generation in carotid sections was affected
by rapamycin or nicorandil, but not by humoral factors.
In CMECs, rapamycin stimulated ROS production,
which was prevented by co-treatment with nicorandil. In
addition, NAC promoted reendothelialization impaired by
rapamycin. Thus, nicorandil promoted reendothelialization
by reducing ROS production. Multiple sources of ROS
may be present in injured arteries. NADPH is activated
by rapamycin in HCAECs [8]. XO is a major source of
ROS in CMECs, atherosclerosis [14] and coronary disease
[15]. Rapamycin directly activates XO in myeloid cells
[16]. Nicorandil inhibits streptozotocin-induced XO
elevation in diabetic rats [17]. We detected an increase
of XO in balloon-injured carotid arteries, and rapamycin
further increased XO protein level. Nicorandil reduced the
XO elevation induced by balloon injury and rapamycin.
Intracellular ROS production in CMECs was significantly

Figure 5: Nicorandil inhibits ROS production in CMECs. A., Intracellular ROS production was detected by DHE staining and

assessed by flow cytometry. CMECs were incubated in rapamycin or nicorandil for 24 h (n=3). CMECs were transfected by XO siRNA or
NC siRNA. B., Summery data of DHE fluorescence in different groups. Values are mean±SE. **p<0.01 vs. rapamycin group.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75932

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Nicorandil promotes CMECs proliferation and migration. A., CMECs were wounded and treated with media alone,

rapamycin (100ng/ml), or rapamycin in the presence of nicorandil (100nM) for 24 h. CMECs were transfected with NC siRNA or XO
siRNA (n=3). B., Summary data of cell migration. Values are mean±SE. **p<0.01 vs. rapamycin group. C., CMECs proliferation were
determined by BrdU proliferation assay kit (n=3). Values are mean±SE. *p<0.05 vs. rapamycin group. D., Cell viability was assessed by
MTT assay kit (n=3). Values are mean±SE. **p<0.01 vs. rapamycin group.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75933

Oncotarget

attenuated after XO knockdown, indicating that XO
is a major source of ROS induced by rapamycin. In
addition, CMECs apoptosis induced by rapamycin was
also greatly alleviated after XO knockdown. Nicorandil
promoted reendothelialization delayed with rapamycin by
suppressing XO generated ROS.
Reendothelialization depends mainly on endothelial
repair of ECs adjacent to the injured area [21]. Cotreatment of nicorandil reversed CMECs proliferation and
migration impaired by rapamycin. Besides, XO siRNAtransfected CMECs showed significant increase in cell
proliferation and migration than those in rapamycin group.
Nicorandil promoted CMECs proliferation and migration
by XO inhibition. The inhibitive effect of nicorandil on
ROS production could be hampered by 5-HD, a selective
mitochondrial KATP antagonist [8]. Nicorandil induces

endothelial cell proliferation and migration, and its effects
can be blocked by 5-HD [11]. Nicorandil also blocks
angiotensin II-induced XO increase by opening KATP
channel in RAW264.7 cells [23]. Impairment of KATP
channel triggers excessive accumulation of intracellular
Ca2+ [24]. In our previous study, XO increase depends
on elevated intracellular Ca2+ [13]. Mitochondrial KATP
channel and intracellular Ca2+ may contribute to the
beneficial effect of nicorandil on reendothelialization, and
related experiments would be operated in our future study.
eNOS attributes to endothelium repair [25], and its
mRNA expression is an indicator of reendothelialization
[18]. Nicorandil is an anti-angina drug with nitrite
like activity. The effects of nicorandil on eNOS are
controversial. 100μM nicorandil has no significant effect on
phosphorylation of eNOS in endothelial cells. Oral intake

Figure 7: Nicorandil promotes Akt/eNOS in CMECs. A., Representative western blots for Akt and phosphor-Akt (Ser473) in

CMECs treated with rapamycin (100ng/ml) or nicorandil (100nM) for 24h (n=3). B., Quantitative analysis of Akt phosphorylation. Values
are mean±SE. **p<0.01 vs. rapamycin group. C., Akt was knockdown by AKt siRNA. Akt expression in CMECs were analyzed by western
blot (n=3). D., Summery data of relative Akt protein. Values are mean±SE. **p<0.01 vs. NC siRNA group. E., eNOS mRNA expression
is determined by qRT-PCR. CMECs were treated with rapamycin or nicorandil, and were transfected with NC siRNA or Akt siRNA (n=3).
Values are mean±SE. **p<0.01 vs. rapamycin-nicorandil co-treatment group.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75934

Oncotarget

of nicorandil increases plasma NO concentration in patients
with coronary slow flow [26]. 15mg/kg/day nicorandil
normalizes decreased eNOS dimer/monomer ratio in
diabetic rat arteries [9]. In the current study, rapamycin
inhibited eNOS mRNA expression, which is consistent
with previous study [27]. Co-treatment of nicorandil
increased eNOS mRNA expression. Akt phosphorylation
is upstream of eNOS and increases endothelial cells
proliferation [20]. Rapamycin inhibits cell proliferation
and Akt phosphorylation in endothelial cells [28]. Our
western bolt analysis showed that phosphorylation of Akt
was inhibited by rapamycin and promoted by nicorandil.
When Akt was knockdown by Akt siRNA, eNOS mRNA
expression increased by nicorandil was abolished.
Nicorandil contributed to reendothelialization partially by
activating Akt/eNOS.
Increased reendothelialization reduces intimal
hyperplasia [18]. Nicorandil promotes capillary but not
arterioles growth in the failing heart of hypertensive
rats [29]. Nicorandil inhibits VSMCs proliferation and
prevents rat pulmonary hypertension [30]. Nicorandil
may inhibit intimal hyperplasia directly by inhibiting
VSMCs proliferation and indirectly by promoting
reendothelialization. Co-treatment of nicorandil inhibited
intimal hyperplasia, but no statistical significance was
observed between rapamycin and rapamycin-nicorandil
co-treatment group (p>0.05). We propose that this is
because rapamycin itself has sufficiently inhibited
intimal hyperplasia and synergistic effects of nicorandil
and rapamycin mainly rescues the deficiencies of
reendothelialization. In addition, SD rats develop less
intima than ApoE-/- mice [31] or diabetic rats after balloon
injury [32]. With more predominant intima, synergistic
effects of nicorandil and rapamycin may exhibit on intimal
hyperplasia.
The concentrations of nicorandil and rapamycin
used in the present study were comparable with previous
studies. 15mg/kg/day nicorandil was well tolerated
and showed protective effects in vivo [9, 17]. Plasma
concentration of nicorandil after a single oral intake
of 30mg/kg would reach 73.7±19.9μM [8], which is
comparable to the concentration of 100μM used in our
in-vitro study. After 1 week oral intake of 15mg/kg/d
nicorandil, plasma concentration would reach 0.9±0.6μM.
The endothelial protective effect in the 1-week
administration group was stronger than that in the single
administration group, which suggests that nicorandil may
accumulate in endothelial cells [8]. 100μM nicorandil
is used in several related in-vitro studies [8, 10, 33].
Systematic concentration of rapamycin ranges from
0.4ng/ml to 2.63±0.74 ng/ml after stent deployment. Local
concentration is much higher due to rapamycin’s lipophilic
properties and it accumulated in the vascular wall. The
total arterial tissue level of rapamycin was 97.13ng/artery
[2]. In-vitro studies use 100ng/ml or 10nM (91.4ng/ml)
rapamycin to detect its effect on endothelial cells [3, 34].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Their concentrations are comparable to our rapamycin
concentration.
We reveal that combining nicorandil with rapamycin
results in an additional benefit-not only inhibiting intimal
hyperplasia but also minimizing the deleterious effect of
rapamycin on reendothelialization. INOA study indicates
that nicorandil reduces major adverse cardiac events in
patients with stable angina [35]. JCAD study finds that
nicorandil reduces cardiovascular death in patients with
ischemic heart disease [36]. Nicorandil, which potentially
facilitates reendothelialization, represents a safe and
effective therapeutic approach for improving the efficacy
and long-term safety of patients undergoing vascular
angioplasty.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Rat carotid balloon injury model
All animal experiments were approved by Animal
Research Committee of Chinese PLA General Hospital.
Experiments were conducted in accordance with the
Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals
published by the US National Institutes of Health (NIH
Publication No.85-23, revised 1996). Sprague-Dawley
(SD) rats (male, n=70, 200-250g) were purchased from
Experimental Animal Center of Chinese PLA General
Hospital (approval No. SCXK 20120001). All rats were
housed in a 12h light/dark cycle room at controlled
temperature (23±2°C) and humidity (50-60%). Animals
have a free access to regular rodent chow and water.
The balloon catheter injury model was created with a
2F Fogarty catheter (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA)
in the left common carotid artery [37]. Briefly, rats were
anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection of pentobarbital
(50mg/kg, Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA). The
balloon was introduced through the left external carotid
artery into the common carotid artery. Inflated the
balloon, and then pass it through the common carotid
arterial lumen 3 times. After removal of the catheter, the
left external carotid artery was legated. The common
carotid artery resumed blood flow. The punched area was
sealed. Post operation analgesic therapy was provided by
intraperitoneal administration of buprenorphine (0.05 mg/
kg/day, Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) for 3 days.
Rats were randomized to sham operation group,
balloon injury (BI) group, rapamycin group, nicorandil
group and rapamycin-nicorandil co-treatment group.
Sham operation group (n=10) was conducted with an
uninflated balloon and treated by gavage feeding and
intraperitoneal injection with vehicle. BI group (n=10)
was given BI procedure and treated by gavage feeding
and intraperitoneal injection with vehicle. Rapamycin
group (n=20) was given BI procedure and treated by
intraperitoneal injection of rapamycin (1mg/kg/day, LC
Laboratories, MA, USA) and gavage feeding with vehicle.
75935

Oncotarget

Nicorandil group (n=10) was given BI procedure and
treated by gavage feeding with nicorandil (15mg/kg/day,
Chugai Pharmaceutical Co., Japan). Rapamycin-nicorandil
co-treatment group (n=10) was given BI procedure and
treated by intraperitoneal injection of rapamycin (1 mg/
kg/day) and gavage feeding with nicorandil (15 mg/kg/
day). To detect the role of ROS in reendothelialization,
NAC (150 mg/kg/day, Beyotime, China) was given BI
procedure and treated by gavage feeding in the rapamycin
and NAC group (n=10). All groups were given different
drugs for 14 days from the 1st day after balloon injury.

in DMEM supplemented with 20% fetal bovine serum
(FBS) (Hyclone, Logan, UT) and seeded in polystyrene
flasks. CMECs were testified by IHC staining of factor
VIII (Abcam, Cambridge, UK) and PECAM-1 (CD31)
(Santa Cruz, CA, USA). Passage 3 to 5 cells are used for
experiments.
CMECs were randomized to control group,
rapamycin group, nicorandil group, and rapamycinnicorandil co-treatment group. Rapamycin group cells
were incubated in rapamycin (100ng/ml, LC Laboratories,
MA, USA) for 24 h. Nicorandil group cells were incubated
in nicorandil (100 μM, Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO,
USA) for 24 h. Rapamycin-nicorandil co-treatment
group cells were incubated in rapamycin (100ng/ml) and
nicorandil (100μM) for 24h.

Morphometric analysis
To measure the reendothelialization area 14 days
after BI, 5% Evans blue (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis,
MO, USA) was injected via the femoral vein. 30 min
after injection, arteries were dissected out from the
carotid bifurcation, and opened longitudinally to
observe the Evans blue uptake macroscopically. The
reendothelialization area was defined as the area not
stained by Evans blue, and reendothelialization was
calculated as the ratio of blue area to the total area. Images
were obtained by digital camera (Cannon, Japan), and
analyzed by Image J 1.49 [34]. To further evaluate the level
of reendothelialization, carotid arteries were fixed in 4%
paraformaldehyde, dehydrated and embedded in paraffin.
5 μm thick sections were prepared at 500 μm intervals
from the carotid bifurcation. 3 serial cross sections were
cut from each artery and immunohistochemical staining
with PECAM-1 (CD31) (Santa Cruz, CA, USA). Images
were obtained by inverted fluorescence microscope
(Olympus Corporation, Tokyo, Japan). In addition, intimal
hyperplasia was measured. Serial cross sections were cut
from each artery and stained with hematoxylin and eosin
(H&E). Images were obtained by inverted phase contrast
microscope (Olympus Corporation, Tokyo, Japan).
Intimal, medial and adventitial cross-sectional areas were
measured by Image J 1.49.

Measurement of ROS
ROS levels in carotid arteries were measured by
dihydroethidium (DHE) staining [37]. Serial frozen fresh
arteries were cut into 10 μm sections on dry ice. Sections
were incubated with DHE (2 μM, Molecular Probes,
Eugene, OR) at 37°C for 30min in a humidified dark
chamber. Images were obtained by inverted fluorescence
microscope (Olympus Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) and
analyzed by Image J 1.49. Intracellular ROS measurement
was conducted by DHE staining in CMECs. Cells were
incubated in DHE (2 μM) for 30min, washed with PBS
for 3 times, collected by trypsinization, and resuspended
in PBS. Fluorescence was detected by flow cytometry
(BD, Mountainview, CA) using excitation/emission
wavelengths of 518/605nm.

Cell apoptosis analysis
Cell apoptosis was analyzed by Annexin V-FITC/
PI kit (Roche, Basal, Switzerland) and Caspase 3 activity
assay kit (Beyotime, China). In brief, 1 × 106 CMECs were
collected, washed twice with PBS, and resuspended in
100 μl buffer containing 2 μl PI and 2 μl Annexin V-FITC.
Then cells were kept in the dark at room temperature
for 15min. Cells were analyzed by flow cytometry (BD,
Mountainview, CA) [39]. Caspase 3 activity was assayed
according to the manufacture’s instruction. In brief,
2 × 106 cells were incubated in extraction buffer for
30min on ice. Cellular extracts (30μg) were incubated with
20ng Ac-DEVD-pNA in a 96-well plate for 2 h at 37°C.
Caspase 3 activity was measured spectrophotometrically
(λ=405nm).

In vitro CMECs culture and drug treatment
SD rat (5-7days, 12-17g, n=60) were purchased
from Experiment Animal Center of PLA General Hospital
(Approval No. SCXK 20120001). CMECs were isolated
from neonatal rat heart by enzyme digestion method
[38]. Rats were anaesthetized by overdose of isoflurane,
and the hearts were obtained. Visible connective tissue,
atria, valvular tissue, right ventricular and the outer
one-fourth left ventricular wall were removed. The
remaining tissue were immersed in 75% ethanol for 20s,
minced into pieces and digested in 0.5% collagenase
type I (Gibco, Grand Island, NY) for 20min and 0.125%
trypsin (Hyclone, Logan, UT) for 10min at 37°C in a
shaking bath. A 100μm nylon mesh was used to filter the
undigested tissue. Dissociated cells were resuspended
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Small interfering RNA transfection
To investigate the roles of XO and Akt in CMECs,
XO or Akt is knocked down by transient transfection
of small interfering RNA (siRNA). 50nM XO siRNA
or Akt siRNA oligonucleotide was transfected in
75936

Oncotarget

CMECs by using lipofectamine RNAIMAX Reagent
(Invitrogen, Ireland). Rat XO siRNA sequence is
5’-CCACCUCCAAGAUUCAUAUTT-3’. Rat Akt siRNA
sequence is 5’-GCAGCCAGCUCUGAUAAUATT-3’.
These siRNA and negative control siRNA were purchased
from GenePharma Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). XO or
Akt knockdown is indentified by western blot. After
48 h of transfection, CMECs were harvested for other
experiments.

phosphor-Akt (Ser473) (D9E) (Cell Signaling Technology,
MA, USA) at the concentration of 1:1000 were used.
Horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies
at the concentration of 1:5000 were incubated for 1 h at
37°C. The immunoreactive proteins on the membrane
were detected by using enhanced chemiluminescence
(Beyotime, China). The signal density of respective bands
were qualified and normalized to GAPDH expression.

Statistical analysis

Cell migration and proliferation

Data were presented as mean±SE. SPSS 13.0 was
used for analysis of data. One-way ANOVA with post-hoc
testing were used for experiments consisting of more than
two groups. If normality test failed, Kruskal-Wallis with
Dunn’s post-hoc test was used. Statistical comparisons
were performed using the paired, two-tailed Student’s t
test for experiments consisting of two groups only. Results
were considered statistically significant when p<0.05.

Cell migration was investigated by wound healing
assay. CEMCs (70-80% confluence) were wound with a
1.15mm diameter pipette tip. CMECs were incubated in
DMEM containing 1% FBS with nicorandil (100μM) or
rapamycin (100ng/ml). After 24 h, scratch photographs
were taken by a phase contrast microscopy (Olympus
Corporation, Tokyo, Japan). Cell proliferation was
assessed by BrdU Cell Proliferation Assay Kit (Cell
Signaling Technology, MA, USA) and a modified
3-(4,5-dimethyl-thiazol-2-yl)-2,5-dyphenyltertrazolium
bromide assay (MTT, Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO,USA)
according to the supplier’s instruction.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Dr. Hua Wei Zhang and Dr. Ming
Zhang (Department of Cardiology, Chinese PLA General
Hospital, Beijng) for their guidance of the carotid balloon
injury procedure.

Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction
analysis (qRT-PCR)

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

Carotid arteries were frozen in liquid nitrogen.
Total RNA was isolated from each 10mg carotid tissue
by homogenization in 500 μl Trizol reagent (Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Total RNA from CMECs was prepared using Trizol reagent.
Reverse transcription was performed using the PrimeScript
reverse transcriptase (Takara Bio, Japan). cDNA was
subjected to SYBR gene reagents with primers specific to
the coding sequence of eNOS and GAPDH for 40 cycles.
GAPDH mRNA was amplified as an internal control.
This procedure was performed using the EcoTM RTPCR
detection system (illumine, San Diego, CA) according to
the manufacturer’s protocol. The primers used were as
follows: 5’-GTGTGACCTGGATCCAGGCTTC-3’(sense)
and 5’-TTCAGTTCAGGGATCCAGGCTG-3’ (antisense)
for GAPDH; 5’-CGA TGC TCC CAA CTT GAC CA3’(sense) and 5’-CCTCAGGATGTCCTGCACGTAG3’(antisense) for eNOS.

Authors declare that there is no conflicts of interest.

GRANT SUPPORT
This work was supported by grants (81441008) from
the National Natural Science Foundation of China.

REFERENCES
1.	 Ma X, Hibbert B, Dhaliwal B, Seibert T, Chen Y-X,
Zhao X, O’Brien ER. Delayed re-endothelialization with
rapamycincoated stents is rescued by the addition of a
glycogen synthase kinase-3b inhibitor. Cardiovascular
Research. 2010; 86: 338–345
2.	 Liu H-T, Li F, Wang W-Y, Li X-J, Liu Y-M, Wang R-A, Guo
W-Y, Wang H-C. Rapamycin Inhibits Re-Endothelialization
after Percutaneous Coronary Intervention. Texas Heart
Institute Journal. 2010; 37:194-201.

Western blot analysis

3.	 Hayashi S-i, Yamamoto A, You F, Yamashita K, Ikegame
Y, Tawada M, Yoshimori T, Shimizu S, Nakashima
S. The Stent-Eluting Drugs Sirolimus and Paclitaxel
Suppress Healing of the Endothelium by Induction of
Autophagy. The American Journal of Pathology. 2009;
175:2226-2234.

After experiments, CMECs were homogenized
in RIPA lysis buffer (Beyotime, China) containing
1 × phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Cell Signaling
Technology, MA, USA). Protein (40μg) was separated
by SDS-PAGE, transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride
membranes, and probed with primary antibodies at 4°C
overnight. Antibodies for XO (Abcam, Cambridge, UK),
Akt (pan) (11E7) (Cell Signaling Technology, MA, USA),
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4.	 Ota H, Eto M, Ako J, Ogawa S, Iijima K, Akishita M, Ouchi
Y. Sirolimus and Everolimus Induce Endothelial Cellular
75937

Oncotarget

Senescence Via Sirtuin 1 Down-Regulation. Journal of the
American College of Cardiology 2009; 53:2298-2305.

xanthine and NAD(P)H oxidase activity in patients with
coronary artery disease: relation to endothelium-dependent
vasodilation. Circulation. 2003; 107:1383-1389.

5.	 Tsuchida A, Miura T, Tanno M, Sakamoto J, Miki T, Kuno
A, Matsumoto T, Ohnuma Y, Ichikawa Y, Shimamoto
K. Infarct size limitation by nicorandil ☆: Roles of
mitochondrial KATP channels, sarcolemmal KATP
channels, and protein kinase C. Journal of the American
College of Cardiology. 2002; 40: 1523–1530.

16.	 Abooali M, Lall GS, Coughlan K, Lall HS, Gibbs BF,
Sumbayev VV. Crucial involvement of xanthine oxidase in
the intracellular signalling networks associated with human
myeloid cell function. Scientific Reports. 2014; 4:6307.
17.	 Mano T, Shinohara R, Nagasakacorrespondence A,
Nakagawa H, Uchimura K, Hayashi R, Nakano I, Tsugawa
T, Watanabe F, Kobayashi T, Fujiwara K, Nakai A, Itoh
M. Scavenging effect of nicorandil on free radicals and
lipid peroxide in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats.
Metabolism. 2000; 49:427-431.

6.	 Kawai Y, Hisamatsu K, Matsubara H, Dan K, Akagi S,
Miyaji K, Munemasa M, Fujimoto Y, Kusano KF, Ohe2
T. Intravenous administration of nicorandil immediately
before percutaneous coronary intervention can prevent slow
coronary flow phenomenon. European Heart Journal. 2009;
30:765–772.

18.	 Pellet-Many C, Mehta V, Fields L, Mahmoud M, Lowe V,
Evans I, Ruivo J, Zachary I. Neuropilins 1 and 2 mediate
neointimal hyperplasia and re-endothelialization following
arterial injury. Cardiovascular Research 2015; 108:288–298.

7.	 LIU L, LIU Y, QI B, WU Q, LI Y, WANG Z. Nicorandil
attenuates endothelial VCAM-1 expression via
thioredoxin production in diabetic rats induced by
streptozotocin. Molecular Medicine Reports. 2014; 9:
2227-2232.

19.	 Kim B-R, Seo SH, Park MS, Lee S-H, Kwon Y, Rho SB.
sMEK1 inhibits endothelial cell proliferation by attenuating
VEGFR-2-dependent-Akt/eNOS/HIF-1α
signaling
pathways. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:31830-31843. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.5570.

8.	 Aizawa K, Takahari Y, Higashijima N, Serizawa K, Yogo
K, Ishizuka N, Endo K, Fukuyama N, Hirano K, Ishida
H. Nicorandil prevents sirolimus-induced production of
reactive oxygen species, endothelial dysfunction, and
thrombus formation. Journal of Pharmacological Sciences.
2015; 127:284-291.

20.	 Guo J, Breen DM, Pereira TJ, Dalvi PS, Zhang H, Mori Y,
Ghanim H, Tumiati L, Fantus G, Bendeck MP, Dandona
P, Rao V, Dolinsky VW, Heximer SP, Giacca A. The effect
of insulin to decrease neointimal growth after arterial
injury is endothelial nitric oxide synthase-dependent.
Atherosclerosis. 2015; 241:111-120.

9.	 Serizawa K-i, Yogo K, Aizawa K, Tashiro Y, Ishizuka
N. Nicorandil prevents endothelial dysfunction due to
antioxidative effects via normalisation of NADPH oxidase
and nitric oxide synthase in streptozotocin diabetic rats.
Cardiovascular Diabetology 2011; 10:105-115.

21.	 Guo N, Chen F, Zhou J, Fang Y, Li H, Luo Y, Yong Zhang.
Curcumin Attenuates Rapamycin-induced Cell Injury of
Vascular Endothelial Cells. Journal of Cardiovascular
Pharmacology. 2015; 66:338-346.

10.	 Sahara M, Sata M, Morita T, Hirata Y, Nagai R. Nicorandil
Attenuates Monocrotaline-Induced Vascular Endothelial
Damage and Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension. Plos One.
2012; 7:e33367.

22.	 Jin C, Zhao Y, Yu L, Xu S, Fu G. MicroRNA-21 mediates
the rapamycin-induced suppression of endothelial
proliferation and migration. FEBS Letters. 2013;
587:378-385.

11.	 Umaru B, Pyriochou A, Kotsikoris V, Papapetropoulos A,
Topouzis S. ATP-Sensitive Potassium Channel Activation
Induces Angiogenesis In Vitro and In Vivo. The Journal
of pharmacology and experimental therapeutics. 2015;
354:79-87.

23.	 Tamura Y, Tanabe K, Kitagawa W, Uchida S, Schreiner
GF, Johnson RJ, Nakagawa T. Nicorandil, a Katp channel
opener, alleviates chronic renal injury by targeting
podocytes and macrophages. American journal of
physiology Renal physiology. 2012.; 303:F339–F349.

12.	 Rosenbaum MA, Miyazaki K, Graham LM.
Hypercholesterolemia Inhibits Endothelial Cell Healing
After Arterial Injury Though Reactive Oxygen Species.
Journal of vascular surgery. 2012; 55:489-496.

24.	 Heberty T. F. Facundo JGdP, Alicia J. Kowaltowski.
Mitochondrial ATP-sensitive K+ channels prevent oxidative
stress, permeability transition and cell death. Journal of
bioenergetics and biomembranes. 2005; 37:75-82.

13.	 Zhang Y, Hu S, Chen Y. Hepatocyte growth factor
suppresses hypoxia/reoxygenationinduced XO activation in
cardiac microvascular endothelial cells. Heart and Vessels.
2014.

25.	 Ulrich V, Konaniah ES, Lee W-R, Khadka S, Shen
Y-M, Herz J, Salmon JE, Hui DY, Shaul PW, Mineo C.
Antiphospholipid Antibodies Attenuate Endothelial Repair
and Promote Neointima Formation in Mice. Journal of
American Heart Association. 2014; 3:e001369.

14.	 Landmesser U, Spiekermann S, Preuss C, Sorrentino S,
Fischer D, Manes C, Mueller M, Drexler H. Angiotensin
II induces endothelial xanthine oxidase activation role for
endothelial dysfunction in patients with coronary disease.
Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2007; 27:943-948.

26.	 Chen Z, Chen X, Li S, Huo X, Fu X, Dong X. Nicorandil
improves myocardial function by regulating plasma nitric
oxide and endothelin-1 in coronary slow flow. Coronary
Artery Disease. 2015; 26:114-120.

15.	 Spiekermann S, Landmesser U, Dikalov S, Bredt M, Gamez
G, Tatge H, Reepschläger N, Hornig B, Drexler H, Harrison
DG. Electron spin resonance characterization of vascular
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75938

Oncotarget

27.	 Reineke DC, Müller-Schweinitzer E, Winkler B, Kunz D,
Konerding MA, Grussenmeyer T, Carrel TP, Eckstein FS,
Grapow MTR. Rapamycin impairs endothelial cell function
in human internal thoracic arteries. European Journal of
Medical Research. 2015; 20:59.

and nitric oxide synthase in streptozotocin diabetic rats.
Cardiovascular Diabetology 2011; 10:105.
34.	 Holy E, Jakob P, Eickner T, Camici GG, Beer JrH,
Akhmedov A, Sternberg K, Schmitz K-P, scher TFL,
Tanner FC. PI3K/p110a inhibition selectively interferes
with arterial thrombosis and neointima formation, but not
re-endothelialization: potential implications for drug-eluting
stent design. European Heart Journal 2014; 35:808–820

28.	 Jin Y-P, Valenzuela NM, Ziegler ME, Rozengurt E, Reed
EF. Everolimus Inhibits Anti-HLA I Antibody-Mediated
Endothelial Cell Signaling, Migration and Proliferation
More Potently Than Sirolimus. American Journal of
Transplantation. 2014; 14:806–819.

35.	 Group TIS. Effect of nicorandil on coronary events in
patients with stable angina: the Impact Of Nicorandil
in Angina (IONA) randomised trial. Lancet. 2002;
359:1269–1275.

29.	 Xu J, Nagata K, Obata K, Ichihara S, Izawa H, Noda
A, Nagasaka T, Iwase M, Naoe T, Murohara T, Yokota
M. Nicorandil promotes myocardial capillary and
arteriolar growth in the failing heart of Dahl salt-sensitive
hypertensive rats. Hypertension. 2005; 46:719-724.

36.	 Horinaka S, Yabe A, Yagi H, Ishimitsu T, Yamazaki T,
Suzuki S. Effects of nicorandil on cardiovascular events
in patients with coronary artery disease in the Japanese
Coronary Artery Disease (JCAD) study. Circulation Journal.
2010; 74:503-509.

30.	 Lee F-Y, Lu H-I, Zhen Y-Y, Leu S, Chen Y-L, Tsai T-H,
Chung S-Y, Chua S, Sheu J-J, Hsu S-Y, Chang H-W, Sun
C-K, Yip H-K. Benefit of combined therapy with nicorandil
and colchicine in preventing monocrotaline-induced rat
pulmonary arterial hypertension. European Journal of
Pharmaceutical Sciences 2013; 50:372–384

37.	 Nakamura K, Yamagishi S-i, Matsui T, Yoshida T, Takenaka
K, Jinnouchi Y, Yoshida Y, Ueda S-i, Adachi H, Imaizumi
T. Pigment Epithelium-Derived Factor Inhibits Neointimal
Hyperplasia after Vascular Injury by Blocking NADPH
Oxidase-Mediated Reactive Oxygen Species Generation.
The American Journal of Pathology. 2007; 170:2159-2170.

31.	 Greig FH, Hutchison L, Spickett CM, Kennedy
S. Differential effects of chlorinated and oxidized
phospholipids in vascular tissue: implications for neointima
formation. Clinical Science. 2015; 128:579-592.

38.	 M. Nishida WWC, M. E. Gerritsen, O. Ellingsen, R. A.
Kelly, T. W. Smith. Isolation and characterization of human
and rat cardiac microvascular endothelial cells. American
Journal of Physiology. 1993; 264: H639-H652

32.	 Srivastava S, Ramana KV, Tammali R, Srivastava SK,
Bhatnagar A. Contribution of Aldose Reductase to Diabetic
Hyperproliferation of Vascular Smooth Muscle Cells.
Diabetes. 2006; 55:901-910.

39.	 Zhang H, Huo M, Jia Y, Xu A. KRT6B, a key mediator
of notch signaling in honokiol-induced human hepatoma
cell apoptosis. International Journal of Clinical and
Experimental Medicine. 2015; 8:16880-16889.

33.	 Serizawa K-i, Yogo K, Aizawa K, Tashiro Y, Ishizuka
N. Nicorandil prevents endothelial dysfunction due to
antioxidative effects via normalisation of NADPH oxidase

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75939

Oncotarget

