Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 9

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Aminomethylphosphonic acid inhibits growth and metastasis of
human prostate cancer in an orthotopic xenograft mouse model
Keshab Raj Parajuli1, Qiuyang Zhang1, Sen Liu1, Zongbing You1,2,3,4,5
1

Departments of Structural & Cellular Biology, Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112, USA

2

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112, USA

3

Tulane Cancer Center and Louisiana Cancer Research Consortium, Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112, USA

4

Tulane Center for Stem Cell Research and Regenerative Medicine, Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112, USA

5

Tulane Center for Aging, Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112, USA

Correspondence to: Zongbing You, e-mail: zyou@tulane.edu
Keywords: aminomethylphosphonic acid, glyphosate, prostate cancer, metastasis, orthotopic xenograft mouse model
Received: October 01, 2015     Accepted: January 23, 2016     Published: January 28, 2016

ABSTRACT
Aminomethylphosphonic acid (AMPA) has been shown to inhibit prostate cancer
cell growth in vitro. The purpose of the present study was to determine if AMPA could
inhibit growth and metastasis of prostate cancer in vivo. Human prostate cancer
PC-3-LacZ-luciferase cells were implanted into the ventral lateral lobes of the prostate
in 39 athymic Nu/Nu nude male mice. Seven days later, mice were randomized into
the control group (n = 14, treated intraperitoneally with phosphate buffered saline),
low dose group (n = 10, treated intraperitoneally with AMPA at 400 mg/kg body
weight/day), and high dose group (n = 15, treated intraperitoneally with AMPA at
800 mg/kg body weight/day). Tumor growth and metastasis were examined every
4-7 days by bioluminescence imaging of live mice. We found that AMPA treatment
significantly inhibited growth and metastasis of orthotopic xenograft prostate tumors
and prolonged the survival time of the mice. AMPA treatment decreased expression of
BIRC2 and activated caspase 3, leading to increased apoptosis in the prostate tumors.
AMPA treatment decreased expression of cyclin D1. AMPA treatment also reduced
angiogenesis in the prostate tumors. Taken together, these results demonstrate that
AMPA can inhibit prostate cancer growth and metastasis, suggesting that AMPA may
be developed into a therapeutic agent for the treatment of prostate cancer.

cofactors [6]. It has been shown that the rapidlyproliferating cancer cells consume excessive glycine
compared to the rapidly-proliferating non-transformed
cells. Silencing hydroxymethyltransferase (SHMT,
an enzyme for conversion of serine into glycine)
expression and deprivation of extracellular glycine
can inhibit proliferation of the cancer cells [7]. AMPA
and glyphosate are analogs of glycine, which can
inhibit the enzyme activities of SHMT [8]. We have
previously shown that glyphosate and AMPA can inhibit
proliferation and promote apoptosis in human prostate
cancer cells, but not in normal cells in vitro [9, 10].
In the present study, our objective was to determine
if AMPA could inhibit prostate cancer growth and
metastasis in vivo.

INTRODUCTION
Aminomethylphosphonic
acid
(AMPA)
is
the primary degradation product of glyphosate
[N-(phosphonomethyl) glycine]. Glyphosate is a broadspectrum herbicide used to kill weeds [1]. Glyphosate
can be converted into AMPA by microorganisms in the
environment or animal bodies [2]. AMPA has no significant
toxicity in acute, subchronic and chronic animal studies,
nor any genotoxicity, teratogenicity or carcinogenicity [3].
Cancer cells undergo specific metabolic
reprogramming to sustain cell survival and proliferation
[4, 5]. In addition to energy consumption, cancer
cells also accumulate cellular components, including
nucleic acids, proteins, and lipids, as well as important

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10616

Oncotarget

RESULTS

including the brain, heart, lungs, liver, kidneys, and
prostate, did not show any differences among the three
groups (data not shown).

AMPA treatment inhibits growth of
orthotopically xenografted human prostate
cancer in athymic nude mice

AMPA treatment prolongs the survival time of
the mice bearing human prostate tumors

We
used
human
prostate
cancer
PC-3-LacZ-luciferase cells that stably expressed
luciferase gene, so that the tumors could be
monitored in live mice using IVIS® Lumina XRMS
bioluminescence imaging system (PerkinElmer,
Waltham, MA, USA). PC-3-LacZ-luciferase cells
were first injected subcutaneously into the flanks
of athymic nude male mice. After three weeks,
subcutaneous tumors were harvested and surgically
implanted into the ventral lateral lobes of the prostates
of 39 athymic nude male mice. Seven days later,
mice were randomized into three groups: 1) control
group (n = 14, treated intraperitoneally with 0.2
ml phosphate buffered saline); 2) low dose group
(n = 10, treated intraperitoneally with AMPA at
400 mg/kg body weight/day); and 3) high dose group
(n = 15, treated intraperitoneally with AMPA at
800 mg/kg body weight/day). The rationale to choose
these doses was that the previous toxicity studies had
shown that 400 mg/kg/day of AMPA did not cause
any adverse effects and 1200 mg/kg/day decreased
body weight gain in rodents, thus a maximum
of 800 mg/kg/day was used as high dose. The doses
are achievable in animals through intraperitoneal
injection and may be achievable in humans through the
same route of administration or through intravenous
infusion, thus the doses are clinically relevant.
Treatment was given daily up to the endpoints (animal
deaths). The tumors were monitored every 4-7 days
using bioluminescence imaging (Figure 1). We found
that all of the mice in the control group were dead
approximately three weeks after tumor implantation
due to large primary tumors and metastases, while
some mice in the AMPA treatment groups survived up
to 35 days. The tumor sizes (represented by the peak
photons flux per second) were not significantly different
among the three groups at day 7 when the treatment
was started. The tumor sizes of the two AMPA treatment
groups were significantly smaller than that of the control
group at days 14 and 21, respectively (Figure 2A). At
necropsy, the average tumor weight of the high dose
group was significantly less than that of the control
group (Figure 2B). The average tumor weight of
the low dose group was slightly less than that of the
control group, but the difference was not statistically
significant (Figure 2B). We monitored animals’ body
weight every 4-7 days and found that there was not
any significant difference among the control, low dose
and high dose groups during the course of treatment
(Figure 2C, p>0.05). The histology of major organs
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

We found that the median survival time of the
control group was approximately 20 days, whereas the
median survival time of the low and high dose groups
was approximately 24 and 26 days, respectively. KaplanMeier curves showed that the survival time of the AMPA
treatment groups was significantly longer than that of the
control group (Figure 3).

AMPA treatment inhibits prostate tumor
metastasis
Bioluminescence imaging detected bioluminescent
signals out of the area of mouse prostates, indicating
tumor metastases (Figure 1). To confirm which organs
had metastatic tumors, we excised the liver, lungs,
pelvic lymph nodes, and spleen, and did ex vivo
bioluminescence imaging. We found that the control
group had high incidence of metastasis into the liver
and pelvic lymph nodes (Figure 4A). The incidence of
metastasis was decreased in the AMPA-treated mice,
particularly in the high dose group (Figure 4B). To
determine whether AMPA could affect cell migration
and invasion, we performed cell migration assays
using Transwell® plates and cell invasion assays using
basement membrane-coated Transwell® plates. The
cancer cells were treated without or with 1, 5, and 15 mM
AMPA for 24 h in migration assays and 48 h in invasion
assays. As shown in Figure 4C-4D, AMPA at doses of 1,
5, and 15 mM effectively decreased migration of both
PC-3-LacZ-luciferase and C4-2-luciferase cells. The
migrated PC-3-LacZ-luciferase cell number was 18.4%
(with 1 mM AMPA), 12.2% (with 5 mM AMPA), and
6.2% (with 15 mM AMPA) of the untreated control
group. The migrated C4-2-luciferase cell number was
12.9% (with 1 mM AMPA), 10.94% (with 5 mM AMPA),
and 5.2% (with 15 mM AMPA) of the untreated control
group (Figure 4C-4D, p<0.01 compared to the control
group). Similarly, AMPA at doses of 1, 5, and 15 mM
effectively decreased invasion of basement membrane in
both PC-3-LacZ-luciferase and C4-2-luciferase cells. The
invaded-through PC-3-LacZ-luciferase cell number was
71% (with 1 mM AMPA), 61.2% (with 5 mM AMPA),
and 11.4% (with 15 mM AMPA) of the untreated
control group. The invaded-through C4-2-luciferase cell
number was 66.3% (with 1 mM AMPA), 60.1% (with
5 mM AMPA), and 52.4% (with 15 mM AMPA) of
the untreated control (Figure 4E-4F, p<0.01 compared
to the control group). Of note, AMPA inhibition of
in vivo metastasis appears to be dose-dependent
10617

Oncotarget

(Figure 4B), whereas the in vitro cell migration and
invasion assays (Figure 4C-4F) appear dose-independent
except PC-3-LacZ-luciferase cell invasion (Figure 4E)
that is dose-dependent. This reflects the differences
between in vivo and in vitro conditions. At least, the
dose-dependent inhibition of PC-3-LacZ-luciferase cell
invasion is consistent with the dose-dependent inhibition
of metastasis.

and high doses decreased the protein expression of
Baculoviral IAP Repeat Containing 2 (BIRC2, also called
cIAP1), but did not change the expression of BIRC3
(also called cIAP2) proteins. AMPA treatment elicited
a dramatic decrease of procaspase 3 protein at the low
dose and essentially abolished procaspase 3 protein at
the high dose, compared to the untreated control tumors
(Figure 5A). Decrease of procaspase 3 indicates cleavage
of procaspase 3 into active caspase 3, a key executioner
caspase in apoptosis [11]. To confirm if caspase 3 was
activated in the tumors, we performed caspase 3 activity
assays. We found that caspase 3 activity was significantly
increased by 1.57- and 1.89-fold in the low and high dose
groups, respectively, compared to the untreated control
group (Figure 5B, p<0.05 or 0.01). Further, procaspase
9 protein levels were increased in the AMPA-treated

AMPA treatment alters expression of apoptotic
and cell cycle regulatory genes
To study the genes involved in apoptosis, we
did Western blot analysis of the protein expression in
the tumors treated without or with AMPA at low and
high doses. As shown in Figure 5A, AMPA at low

Figure 1: Non-invasive monitoring of orthotopic xenograft human prostate cancer in athymic nude mice. Representative
bioluminescence images of the anesthetized mice from the control and AMPA-treated groups are shown. The days indicate the time of
bioluminescence imaging after tumor implantation and the daily treatment started at day 7. Arrows indicate the primary prostate tumors and
arrowheads indicate liver and other intraabdominal metastases. The chemical structure of AMPA is present.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10618

Oncotarget

AMPA treatment decreases proliferation,
increases apoptosis, and reduces angiogenesis

tumors, compared to the untreated tumors (Figure 5A). In
addition, we also observed a dramatic decrease of cyclin
D1 protein levels in the tumors treated with high dose of
AMPA (Figure 5A). This change was specific for cyclin
D1 as cyclin D3 levels were almost undetectable in the
tumors (data not shown).

We performed histopathological examination of the
primary tumors derived from PC-3-LacZ-luciferase cells
and confirmed that the tumors contained cells with typical

Figure 2: Effects of AMPA treatment on prostate tumor growth in athymic nude mice. A. The bioluminescence values

(photons flux/sec) of the prostate region were quantified for each group of mice and the mean ± SEM (error bars) are plotted over time.
The number of animals in each group was shown under the X-axis, which is decreased during the time course due to animal deaths. B.
The prostate tumor weights at necropsy. Data represent the mean ± SEM with the number of animals shown under the X-axis. *p<0.05 and
**p<0.01, compared to the control group. C. Animals’ body weight was monitored every 4-7 days. Data represent the mean ± SEM with
the indicated animal number. There is not any significant difference among the control, low dose and high dose groups during the course
of treatment (p>0.05).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10619

Oncotarget

malignant features (Figure 6A-6C). Immunohistochemical
(IHC) staining showed that the Ki-67-positive cell number
was slightly decreased in the tumors treated with low
dose AMPA, however, the Ki-67-positive cell number
was significantly decreased in the tumors treated with
high dose AMPA, compared to the untreated tumors
(Figure 6D-6G, p<0.01). On the other hand, the number
of apoptotic cells as detected by terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) staining
was significantly increased in the tumors treated with
both low and high doses of AMPA, compared to the
untreated tumors (Figure 6H-6K, p<0.05 or 0.01). Further,
we evaluated the density of microvessels in the tumors
by IHC staining of CD31. We found that the density of
microvessels was significantly decreased in the tumors
treated with both low and high doses of AMPA, compared
to the untreated tumors (Figure 6L-6O, p<0.01).

invasion. These findings clearly demonstrate that AMPA
has anti-cancer function. Of note, the high-dose group had
smaller primary tumor and a lower rate of metastases at
the endpoint compared to the control group, which raised
a question whether the tumor burden was the key reason
that caused death in the high-dose group. Our answer to
this question is that the tumor burden is still the key reason
for animal death, because the reduced tumor burden in the
high-dose group is relative to the control group at the time
point for comparison. As the high-dose animals survived
longer time, the tumors continued to grow in size and in
number of metastases, which eventually led to animal
death.
How AMPA exerts its function has been shown in our
previous in-vitro studies [9, 10]. We demonstrated previously
that AMPA up-regulated p53 and p21 as well as procaspase
9, activated caspase 3, and down-regulated cyclin D3 in C42B cells [9]. AMPA and particularly AMPA in combination
with methoxyacetic acid down-regulated BIRC2 expression
in PC-3 cells [10]. Therefore, we assessed the expression
levels of the aforementioned genes in the tumors.
Consistently, we found that BIRC2 protein expression
was abolished in the tumors treated with low or high dose
of AMPA. It appears that AMPA specifically decreased
BIRC2 expression, as BIRC3 levels were not changed by
AMPA treatment. The exact molecular mechanisms of how
AMPA decreases expression of BIRC2 and cyclin D are not
known. We speculate that AMPA may cause stress responses
in the cancer cells due to interruption of peptide synthesis
(because AMPA is a glycine analog) and/or nucleic acid

DISCUSSION
In the present study, we demonstrated that AMPA
inhibited tumor growth and metastasis in an orthotopic
xenograft mouse model of prostate cancer [12]. We
showed that the tumor size was smaller in the AMPAtreated mice compared to the untreated control mice. The
AMPA-treated mice survived longer than the untreated
control mice. AMPA treatment decreased the number of
metastatic tumors in the liver and pelvic lymph nodes.
The anti-metastatic property of AMPA may be due to
AMPA’s function in inhibiting cancer cell migration and

Figure 3: AMPA treatment prolongs the survival time of mice with prostate tumors. Kaplan-Meier survival curves of mice
treated without or with low and high doses of AMPA are shown. P values from each comparison are presented.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10620

Oncotarget

synthesis (because glycine provides the central C2N subunit
of all purines). Overexpression of BIRC2 has been shown
to suppress apoptosis induced by a variety of stimuli [13–
16]. BIRC2 has been shown to bind and potently inhibit
caspase 3 [17, 18]. Here we found that AMPA treatment
led to cleavage of procaspase 3 and increase of caspase 3
activities. Since caspase 3 is a key executioner caspase for
apoptosis [11], it is not surprising that we found an increase

in apoptotic cells in the tumors treated with AMPA. Thus,
our findings suggest that AMPA decreases BIRC2 expression
to activate caspase 3 and then induce apoptosis in the cancer
cells. We also observed an increase of procaspase 9 levels
by AMPA treatment, which is consistent to our findings in
in-vitro studies [9, 10]. Increased procaspase 9 level may
increase formation of Apaf-1/procaspase 9 complex to
initiate apoptosis as shown by Sakai et al [19].

Figure 4: AMPA treatment inhibits prostate cancer metastasis in vivo and cell migration/invasion in vitro. A. Representative

bioluminescence images of the excised liver, lungs, pelvic lymph node, and spleen from the control and high dose groups. Arrows indicate
the organs with metastasis as identified by bioluminescence imaging. B. Percentage of metastasis from each group is shown on the Y-axis
and the actual number of animals with metastases is shown under the X-axis. C–F. Effects of AMPA on cell migration and invasion. PC3-LacZ-luciferase and C4-2-luciferase cells were plated in Transwell® plates and treated with AMPA at concentrations of 1, 5, and 15 mM
for 24 h in migration assays and 48 h for invasion assays as described in Materials and Methods. The quantification of cell migration and
invasion was normalized to the control group (without AMPA treatment); **p<0.01, compared to the control group.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10621

Oncotarget

We found that cyclin D1 levels were dramatically
decreased in the tumors treated with high dose of
AMPA, but not much in the tumors treated with
low dose of AMPA. This difference at molecular
levels is consistent with the difference in tumor
cell proliferation, that is, only high dose AMPA
significantly decreased cell proliferation as shown by
Ki-67 staining. Cyclin D1 is a key regulator of G1-to-S
phase transition of the cells. Overexpression of cyclin
D1 is associated with an oncogenic event in androgenindependent metastatic prostate cancer, suggesting
a link of cyclin D1 expression to metastasis [20].
Comstock et al. [21] reported that nuclear localization
of cyclin D1 is associated with lymph node metastasis
of prostate cancer. Cyclin D1 has been shown to
promote cellular motility through inhibiting Rhoactivated kinase signaling and repressing the metastasis
suppressor thrombospondin 1 [22]. Thus, AMPA
inhibits prostate cancer metastasis through suppressing
cyclin D1 expression, implicating that AMPA may
be used for prevention of prostate cancer metastasis.
Deprivation of extracellular glycine slowed down fast

proliferating cancer cells by prolonging the G1 phase
of the cell cycle [7]. Our findings suggest that AMPA
inhibits cell proliferation through decreasing cyclin D1
expression.
Angiogenesis is a physiologic process involving
the growth of new blood vessels from preexisting vessels
and is required for tumor growth and metastasis [23].
The growth of solid tumors depends on angiogenesis
and suppression of angiogenesis offers an option for the
treatment of cancer [24]. We found that AMAP reduced
the density of microvessels in the tumors, which indicates
that AMPA may also inhibit angiogenesis.
In summary, we have demonstrated that AMPA
inhibits growth and metastasis of orthotopically
xenografted human prostate cancer and prolongs the
survival of animal hosts. AMPA specifically decreases
BIRC2 expression to activate caspase 3, leading to
apoptosis of the tumor cells. AMPA decreases cyclin
D1 to inhibit tumor cell proliferation and metastasis.
AMPA also inhibits angiogenesis. Our findings suggest
that AMPA may be a potential anticancer agent in the
treatment of human prostate cancer.

Figure 5: AMPA treatment changes gene expression in the prostate tumors. A. Five prostate tumors from each group were
randomly selected for Western blot analysis of protein expression. B. Caspase 3 activity was assessed and data represented the mean ± SEM
(n = 5). *p<0.05 and **p<0.01, compared to the control group (without AMPA treatment).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10622

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

subcutaneous and surgical orthotopic transplantation of
PC-3-LacZ-luciferase cells or fresh xenograft tumor tissues.
All of the mice were maintained in a specific pathogen-free
environment. All of the mice were maintained in a daily
cycle of 12 hour (h) light and 12 h darkness. PC-3-LacZluciferase cells were injected subcutaneously in both flanks
of five mice. Three weeks later, fresh tumor tissues were
harvested from these mice. The tumor tissues from the
periphery of the subcutaneous tumors were cut into small
cubes of approximately 1 mm3 in phosphate-buffered saline

Mice
Animal protocol was approved by the Animal Care
and Use Committee of Tulane University in accordance to
the National Institutes of Health Guidelines for the Care
and Use of Laboratory Mice. Six to eight-weeks-old Ncrnu/nu male mice were purchased from the National Cancer
Institute Animal Production Program and were used for

Figure 6: AMPA treatment inhibits tumor cell proliferation, increase tumor cell apoptosis, and reduces density of
microvessels in the prostate tumors. A-C. Representatives of H&E stained prostate tumor sections from each group. D-F. Ki-67

staining; arrows indicate the positive cells. G. Percentage of Ki-67 positive cells counted in five high-power fields. H-J. TUNEL staining;
arrows indicate the positive cells. K. Percentage of apoptotic cells was counted in five high-power fields. L-N. Representatives of CD31
staining; arrows indicate microvessels. O. The number of microvessels was counted in five high-power fields. Original magnification, x400;
scale bars, 20 μm. *p<0.05 and **p<0.01, compared to the control group.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10623

Oncotarget

Western blot analysis

(PBS). The tumor pieces were randomly mixed and an equal
amount of 5 pieces were implanted in each mouse prostate
as described [25]. A total of 39 mice were anesthetized
with 2-4% isoflurane inhalation. The skin over the lower
abdomen was gently cleaned prior to disinfection by 70%
ethanol and then followed by Betadine solution. A 0.5 cm
incision was made right above symphysis pubis to expose
the prostate gland. The fascia surrounding the ventral
portion of the prostate was carefully isolated and the two
ventral lateral lobes of the gland were separated by a small
incision using a pair of fine surgical scissors. Five tumor
pieces were sutured into the incision using an 8-0 nylon
suture. The two parts of the separated lobes of the prostate
gland were then sutured together with the five tumor pieces
wrapped within. The surrounding fascia was then used to
wrap this portion of the gland. The testes were exposed
by pulling the epididymal adipose tissue. A hemostat was
applied to curtail blood flow followed by ligation with
6-0 sutures and removal of the testes. Buprenex (0.1 mg/
kg) was given subcutaneously as analgesics at the end of
surgical procedure and then every 12 h up 48 h.

A portion of the excised prostate tumor tissues from
5 randomly selected mice per group was used to prepare
whole tissue lysates. Briefly, prostate tissues were sonicated
in radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) lysis buffer
(50 mM sodium fluoride, 0.5% Igepal® CA-630 [NP-40],
10 mM sodium phosphate, 150 mM sodium chloride, 25
mM Tris pH 8.0, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride,
2 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid [EDTA], 1.2 mM
sodium vanadate) supplemented with protease inhibitor
cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich Corp, St Louis, MO, USA). The
lysates were centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 15 min at 4°C.
Supernatants (proteins) were collected and stored at −80°C
until further use. Fifty μg of proteins were subjected to 10%
sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
and transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride membranes
(Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA). The
membranes were blocked with 5% nonfat dry milk in TBST
buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl, 125 mM NaCl, 0.1% Tween 20)
for 1 hour and probed with the indicated primary antibodies
overnight and then IRDye®800CW- or IRDye®680conjugated secondary antibodies (LI-COR Biosciences Inc,
Lincoln, NE, USA) for 1 hour. The results were visualized
using an Odyssey® Infrared Imager (LI-COR Biosciences
Inc). For loading control, the membranes were stripped
and probed for glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase
(GAPDH). The antibodies used were: rabbit anti-procaspase
9 and mouse anti-cyclin D3 antibodies were purchased from
Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, MA, USA). Rabbit
anti-BIRC2 and rabbit anti-BIRC3 antibodies were obtained
from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Dallas, TX, USA). Mouse
anti-GAPDH and mouse anti-procaspase 3 antibodies were
purchased from EMD Millipore Corp (Billerica, MA,
USA). Rabbit anti-cyclin D1 antibodies were purchased
from Abcam (Cambridge, MA, USA).

Treatment and bioluminescence imaging
One week after orthotopic tumor implantation, the
tumor size was monitored by non-invasive bioluminescent
imaging, using IVIS® Lumina XRMS Series III (PerkinElmer,
Waltham, MA, USA). Then, the mice were stratified
according to the tumor size and randomized into three groups
bearing tumors with equal average sizes (i.e., there was no
statistically significant difference). The three groups were: 1)
control group (n = 14, treated intraperitoneally with 0.2 ml
PBS); 2) low dose group (n = 10, treated intraperitoneally
with AMPA at 400 mg/kg body weight/day); and 3) high
dose group (n = 15, treated intraperitoneally with AMPA at
800 mg/kg body weight/day). Treatment was given daily up
to the endpoints (animal deaths). The tumors were monitored
every 4-7 days using bioluminescence imaging. Briefly, 200
μl PBS containing 3 mg substrate D-luciferin sodium salt
(Gold Biotechnology, St Louis, MO, USA) was injected
intraperitoneally in each mouse prior to imaging. Image
acquisition started immediately with a series of images taken
once every two minutes up to 30 minutes, thus determining
the peak light emission. One second (sec) exposure was
acquired (Emission filter: open f/stop: 1, binning: medium).
Region of interest (ROI) of the same size and shape was
used for all mice throughout the study. The bioluminescence
images were quantified by measuring the total photons over
the prostate region and the average photon flux within the ROI
was calculated as photon flux/sec, using the vendor’s software
(Living Image® 4.0, PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA, USA).
Bioluminescence imaging was also performed in the excised
liver, lungs, pelvic lymph nodes, and spleen at necropsy.
The animals were observed to their natural death or were
euthanized when the veterinarian determined that they were
terminally sick with no more than 12 hours of survival time.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Caspase 3 activity assay
Caspase 3 activity assay was measured with ApoAlert®
Caspase 3 Colorimetric Assay Kit (Clontech Laboratories,
Inc., Mountain View, CA, USA) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, the prostate tumor tissues
were lysed and centrifuged. The supernatant was analyzed for
protein concentration and 200 μg of protein in a 50 μl volume
was mixed with 50 μl of 2x reaction buffer and 5 μl of 4 mM
DEVD-pNA substrate was added to produce a final substrate
concentration of 200 μM. After 90-minutes incubation at
37°C, absorbance was measured at 405 nm using a plate
reader (Bio-Tek U.S., Winooski, VT, USA). Fold increase in
caspase 3 activity was determined by comparing the results of
treated samples with the level of the untreated control.

Migration and invasion assay
PC-3-LacZ-luciferase and C4-2-luciferase cells (stably
expressing luciferase gene transfected into human prostate
10624

Oncotarget

Statistical analysis

cancer cell lines) were trypsinized and resuspended in serum
free medium. In migration assays, the Transwell® plates
(Corning Life Sciences, Corning, NY, USA) used were the
product #3422 with 8.0-μm pore polycarbonate membranes
as inserts, and in invasion assays, the Transwell® inserts were
coated with Culture® basement membrane (product #3458).
Approximately 2×105cells/well were placed in the upper
chamber of Transwell® inserts and treated with AMPA at
concentration of 1, 5, and 15 mM. The control group was
treated with PBS. The lower chamber was filled with medium
containing 10% fetal bovine serum as chemoattractant. Each
group had triplicate wells. After 24 (in migration assays) and
48 h (in invasion assays), the cells remained (not migrated
or invaded) in the upper chamber were removed with cottontipped applicators. The cells that migrated or invaded to
the lower chamber were lysed with 300 μl cell lysis buffer.
Luciferase activity of 100 μl of the cell lysates was determined
using Bright-Glo™ Luciferase Assay System (Promega,
Madison, WI, USA) in an Optocomp II luminometer (MGM
Instruments, Inc., Hamden, CT, USA). Because the cells
stably expressed luciferase genes, the luciferase signals
were proportional to the number of the cells migrated or
invaded through the inserts. The AMPA-treated groups were
normalized to the control group (without AMPA treatment).

The normality of the bioluminescence imaging data
was assessed and the log-transformed values were found to
conform to normality assumptions better than raw values.
Thus, subsequent analysis used the log-transformed values.
The quantitative data were presented as the mean ± standard
error of the mean (SEM) and analyzed with the Student’s
t test (two-tailed). Animal survival time was determined
utilizing Kaplan-Meier survival analysis and the log-rank test.
Differences in metastases were analyzed using Chai-square
test. A p-value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in whole or in part
by Department of Defense (W81XWH-14-1-0050,
W81XWH-14-1-0149,
W81XWH-14-1-0458,
and
W81XWH-15-1-0444), National Institutes of Health
(P20GM103518 and R01CA174714), the Developmental
Fund of Tulane Cancer Center (TCC), Louisiana Cancer
Research Consortium (LCRC) Fund, and Tulane’s Institute
of Integrated Engineering for Health and Medicine
(TI2EHM). The funding agencies had no role in the
design, collection, analysis, and interpretation of data,
in the writing of the manuscript, and in the decision to
submit the manuscript for publication. The content of this
article is solely the responsibility of the authors and does
not necessarily represent the official views of the National
Institutes of Health or the Department of Defense.

Immunohistochemical and terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP
nick end labeling (TUNEL) staining
At necropsy, the prostate tumors were dissected out
and weighed. Tumor tissues and major organs were fixed
in 4% paraformaldehyde, embedded in paraffin, and cut
into 4-μm-thick sections. Hematoxylin & eosin (H&E)
staining was performed to evaluate tissue morphology.
Ki-67 and CD31 immunohistochemical staining was
performed as described previously [26, 27]. The antibodies
and reagents used were: rabbit anti-Ki-67 (1:200 dilution,
EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA); rabbit anti-CD31
(Ab28364, 1:50 dilution, Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA);
and Vectastain® ABC kit (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame,
CA, USA). Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferasemediated dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) staining was
performed using TACS. XL® Blue Label In Situ Apoptosis
Detection Kits (Trevigen, Inc., Gaithersburg, MD, USA)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions [26]. To
quantify Ki-67-positive and TUNEL-positive cells, three
prostate tumors from each group were randomly selected
and stained. Approximately 200 cells per field of five highpower fields (x400 magnification) of each prostate tumor
were counted and the percentages of positive cells were
calculated as the number of positive cells divided by the
total number of cells. The density of micro-vessels was
evaluated by counting the CD31-positive microvessels in
five high-power fields per tumor and the average number of
CD31-positive microvessels per high-power field in three
random mouse prostate tumors per group was compared.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CONFLICT OF INTERESTS
The authors declared no conflict of interests.

REFERENCES
1.	 Kudzin ZH, Gralak DK, Drabowicz J and Luczak J. Novel
approach for the simultaneous analysis of glyphosate and its
metabolites. J Chromatogr A. 2002; 947:129-141.
2.	 Vereecken H. Mobility and leaching of glyphosate: a
review. Pest Manag Sci. 2005; 61:1139-1151.
3.	 Williams GM, Kroes R and Munro IC. Safety evaluation and risk assessment of the herbicide Roundup and its
active ingredient, glyphosate, for humans. Regul Toxicol
Pharmacol. 2000; 31:117-165.
4.	 Vander Heiden MG, Cantley LC and Thompson CB.
Understanding the Warburg effect: the metabolic
requirements of cell proliferation. Science. 2009;
324:1029-1033.
5.	 Cairns RA, Harris IS and Mak TW. Regulation of cancer
cell metabolism. Nat Rev Cancer. 2011; 11:85-95.
6.	 Schulze A and Harris AL. How cancer metabolism is tuned
for proliferation and vulnerable to disruption. Nature. 2012;
491:364-373.
10625

Oncotarget

7.	 Jain M, Nilsson R, Sharma S, Madhusudhan N, Kitami
T, Souza AL, Kafri R, Kirschner MW, Clish CB and
Mootha VK. Metabolite profiling identifies a key role for
glycine in rapid cancer cell proliferation. Science. 2012;
336:1040-1044.

18.	 Roy N, Deveraux QL, Takahashi R, Salvesen GS
and Reed JC. The c-IAP-1 and c-IAP-2 proteins are
direct inhibitors of specific caspases. EMBO J. 1997;
16:6914-6925.
19.	 Sakai T, Liu L, Teng X, Mukai-Sakai R, Shimada H,
Kaji R, Mitani T, Matsumoto M, Toida K, Ishimura K,
Shishido Y, Mak TW and Fukui K. Nucling recruits
Apaf-1/pro-caspase-9 complex for the induction
of stress-induced apoptosis. J Biol Chem. 2004;
279:41131-41140.

8.	 Anderson DD and Stover PJ. SHMT1 and SHMT2 are functionally redundant in nuclear de novo thymidylate biosynthesis. PLoS One. 2009; 4:e5839.
9.	 Li Q, Lambrechts MJ, Zhang Q, Liu S, Ge D, Yin R, Xi
M and You Z. Glyphosate and AMPA inhibit cancer cell
growth through inhibiting intracellular glycine synthesis.
Drug Des Devel Ther. 2013; 7:635-643.

20.	 Drobnjak M, Osman I, Scher HI, Fazzari M and CordonCardo C. Overexpression of cyclin D1 is associated with
metastatic prostate cancer to bone. Clin Cancer Res. 2000;
6:1891-1895.

10.	 Parajuli KR, Zhang Q, Liu S and You Z.
Aminomethylphosphonic acid and methoxyacetic acid
induce apoptosis in prostate cancer cells. Int J Mol Sci. 2015;
16:11750-11765.

21.	 Comstock CE, Revelo MP, Buncher CR and Knudsen KE.
Impact of differential cyclin D1 expression and localisation
in prostate cancer. Br J Cancer. 2007; 96:970-979.

11.	 McIlwain DR, Berger T and Mak TW. Caspase functions
in cell death and disease. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol.
2013; 5:a008656.

22.	 Li Z, Wang C, Jiao X, Lu Y, Fu M, Quong AA, Dye C,
Yang J, Dai M, Ju X, Zhang X, Li A, Burbelo P, Stanley
ER and Pestell RG. Cyclin D1 regulates cellular migration
through the inhibition of thrombospondin 1 and ROCK signaling. Mol Cell Biol. 2006; 26:4240-4256.

12.	 Jenkins DE, Yu SF, Hornig YS, Purchio T and Contag PR. In
vivo monitoring of tumor relapse and metastasis using bioluminescent PC-3M-luc-C6 cells in murine models of human
prostate cancer. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2003; 20:745-756.

23.	 Folkman J. Angiogenesis and proteins of the hemostatic
system. J Thromb Haemost. 2003; 1:1681-1682.

13.	 Duckett CS, Nava VE, Gedrich RW, Clem RJ, Van Dongen
JL, Gilfillan MC, Shiels H, Hardwick JM and Thompson
CB. A conserved family of cellular genes related to the baculovirus iap gene and encoding apoptosis inhibitors. EMBO
J. 1996; 15:2685-2694.

24.	 Cao Y. Angiogenesis: What can it offer for future medicine? Exp Cell Res. 2010; 316:1304-1308.
25.	 RM H. Orthotopic metastatic mouse models of prostate cancer, in Ablin RJ and Mason MD (eds), Cancer Metastasis
- Biology and Treatment: Metastasis of Prostate Cancer.
Ablin RJ, Mason MD, editors: Springer Science+Business
Media B.V., 2008, pp143-169,.

14.	 Liston P, Roy N, Tamai K, Lefebvre C, Baird S, ChertonHorvat G, Farahani R, McLean M, Ikeda JE, MacKenzie A
and Korneluk RG. Suppression of apoptosis in mammalian
cells by NAIP and a related family of IAP genes. Nature.
1996; 379:349-353.

26.	 Zhang Q, Liu S, Ge D, Xue Y, Xiong Z, Abdel-Mageed
AB, Myers L, Hill SM, Rowan BG, Sartor O, Melamed
J, Chen Z and You Z. Interleukin-17 promotes formation
and growth of prostate adenocarcinoma in mouse models.
Cancer Res. 2012; 72:2589-2599.

15.	 Ambrosini G, Adida C and Altieri DC. A novel anti-apoptosis gene, survivin, expressed in cancer and lymphoma. Nat
Med. 1997; 3:917-921.
16.	 Li F, Ambrosini G, Chu EY, Plescia J, Tognin S, Marchisio
PC and Altieri DC. Control of apoptosis and mitotic spindle
checkpoint by survivin. Nature. 1998; 396:580-584.

27.	 Zhang Q, Liu S, Xiong Z, Wang AR, Myers L, Melamed
J, Tang WW and You Z. Interleukin-17 promotes development of castration-resistant prostate cancer potentially through creating an immunotolerant and proangiogenic tumor microenvironment. Prostate. 2014;
74:869-879.

17.	 Deveraux QL, Takahashi R, Salvesen GS and Reed JC.
X-linked IAP is a direct inhibitor of cell-death proteases.
Nature. 1997; 388:300-304.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10626

Oncotarget

