Cancer
Research

Molecular and Cellular Pathobiology

KRas Induces a Src/PEAK1/ErbB2 Kinase Ampliﬁcation
Loop That Drives Metastatic Growth and Therapy Resistance
in Pancreatic Cancer
Jonathan A. Kelber1,3, Theresa Reno1,3, Sharmeela Kaushal3, Cristina Metildi3,4, Tracy Wright1,3,
Konstantin Stoletov1,3, Jessica M. Weems1,3, Frederick D. Park1,2,3, Evangeline Mose3, Yingchun Wang5,
Robert M. Hoffman4,6, Andrew M. Lowy3,4, Michael Bouvet3,4, and Richard L. Klemke1,3

Abstract
Early biomarkers and effective therapeutic strategies are desperately needed to treat pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC), which has a dismal 5-year patient survival rate. Here, we report that the novel tyrosine
kinase PEAK1 is upregulated in human malignancies, including human PDACs and pancreatic intraepithelial
neoplasia (PanIN). Oncogenic KRas induced a PEAK1-dependent kinase ampliﬁcation loop between Src, PEAK1,
and ErbB2 to drive PDAC tumor growth and metastasis in vivo. Surprisingly, blockade of ErbB2 expression
increased Src-dependent PEAK1 expression, PEAK1-dependent Src activation, and tumor growth in vivo,
suggesting a mechanism for the observed resistance of patients with PDACs to therapeutic intervention.
Importantly, PEAK1 inactivation sensitized PDAC cells to trastuzumab and gemcitabine therapy. Our ﬁndings,
therefore, suggest that PEAK1 is a novel biomarker, critical signaling hub, and new therapeutic target in PDACs.
Cancer Res; 72(10); 2554–64. 2012 AACR.

Introduction
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the fourth
leading cause of cancer-related death. Newly diagnosed
patients with PDACs have a median survival of less than 1 year
and a 5-year survival rate of 3% to 5% (1, 2). While oncogenic
KRas is the initiating mutation in nearly all PDACs, the
development of effective therapies targeting this GTPase
or downstream effectors has shown little promise in ﬁghting
this disease to date (1–3). Therefore, functional biomarkers
that can identify early onset of PDAC and that may be viable
therapeutic targets are highly sought after (1, 2).
In addition to activating mutations in the KRas oncogene,
more than 60% of PDACs have elevated Src activity (4) and
overexpress ErbB2 (3). Thus, therapeutic targeting of Src or
ErbB2 may be promising for the majority of patients. However,
there have been a limited number of studies testing this
hypothesis, and these have not been conclusive (4–9). This
may be due to the combined effects of multiple oncogenic
pathways contributing to disease progression in PDAC, or

there may be unidentiﬁed molecular regulators that induce
therapy-resistant phenotypes (10, 11).
We recently identiﬁed PEAK1 (pseudopodium-enriched
atypical kinase one, SGK269) as a catalytically active nonreceptor tyrosine kinase that associates with the cytoskeleton
and regulates cell migration and proliferation (12). Tyrosine
kinases are important candidates as biomarkers and therapeutic targets because they induce speciﬁc phosphorylation signatures and their catalytic activity and downstream signals can
be inhibited by small molecules (13). The goal of this current
study was to assess the role of PEAK1 expression as a diagnostic/prognostic biomarker and potential therapeutic target
in human malignancies. In this regard, we show that PEAK1
upregulation occurs in multiple human malignancies (including PDAC), PEAK1 is necessary for PDAC growth and metastasis
in vivo, KRas induces PEAK1-dependent Src/PEAK1/ErbB2
signaling, and that PEAK1 is an oncogenic rheostat, which
balances Src activity to promote PDAC therapy resistance.

Materials and Methods
Authors' Afﬁliations: Departments of 1Pathology and 2Medicine, 3Moores
Cancer Center, 4Department of Surgery, Division of Surgical Oncology,
UCSD, La Jolla, California; 5Institute of Genetics and Developmental
Biology, Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, China; and 6AntiCancer,
Inc., San Diego, California
Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research
Online (http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Corresponding Author: Richard L. Klemke, School of Medicine, UCSD
9500 Gilman Drive #0612, La Jolla, CA 92093. Phone: 858-822-5610; Fax:
858-822-4566; E-mail: rklemke@ucsd.edu
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3552
2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

2554

Cancer Res; 72(10) May 15, 2012

Cell lines, DNA/lentiviral constructs, and reagents
Details about cell lines and culture conditions are given in
the Supplementary Materials and Methods. shCntrl and
shPEAK1 (FG12 vector) constructs have been previously published (12). The shPEAK1 [30 untranslated region (UTR)] and
shErbB2 (pLK0.1 vector) constructs were purchased from
Open Biosystems/The RNAi Consortium (Thermo Scientiﬁc).
Control, PEAK1, and ErbB2 shRNA sequences and details
about lentiviral production are given in the Supplementary
Materials and Methods. Short hairpin RNA (shRNA)/siRNA
pools (containing at least 4 unique siRNA sequences each)

KRas-Induced PEAK1 Signaling in Pancreatic Cancer

against KRas (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, shRNA lentivirus
particles) and Src (Dharmacon, siRNA transient transfection)
were purchased along with the appropriate nontargeting control siRNAs. GFP-vector, GFP-PEAK1, and GFP-PEAK1
mutants have been previously described (12). For stable overexpression of PEAK1 and 30 UTR shRNA rescue experiments,
human PEAK1 was subcloned into the pCSC-SP-PW-GFP
lentiviral vector (Addgene) with EcoRI and KpnI sites and
transduced cells were sorted for GFP. Empty vector and
NeuT constructs (pBabe-puro vector) have been previously
described and were used with the appropriate packaging DNAs
to generate retroviral particles for cell transduction (14).
Details about antibodies, inhibitors, and other reagents are
given in the Supplementary Materials and Methods. Trastuzumab was provided by Genentech under MTA agreement
#210708.
Oncomine analysis
Normalized PEAK1, Src, or ErbB2 expression data and P
values were downloaded from Oncomine (Compendia Bioscience). Citations for individual studies are included in the
Supplementary Data. Heatmaps were generated by Excel.
Gene expression levels were plotted with Tukey or average
 SEM analyses for each patient group.
Immunohistochemistry
Human pancreatic cancer tissue array was purchased from
US Biomax, Inc. PDX-1-Cre:LSL-KRASG12D mouse pancreas
sections were kindly provided by A.M. Lowy. Samples from
patients BK-13 and BK-14 were collected and processed as
described later in accordance with UCSD (La Jolla, CA) Institutional Review Board (IRB) #071136X. PEAK1 protein expression was determined with the standard avidin-biotin immunoperoxidase procedures, sodium citrate antigen retrieval
methods, and the VECTASTAIN Elite ABC Kit from Vector
Laboratories according to the manufacturer's protocol.
Mouse monoclonal anti-SGK269 and rabbit polyclonal antiPEAK1 were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology and
Millipore, respectively, and used at a 1:200 dilution. AntiErbB2 (29D8) and anti-Src (36D10) antibodies were purchased
from Cell Signaling and used according to manufacturer's
recommendations. Images were collected with a Leica
DM2500 microscope.
Mouse strains
The PDX-1-Cre:LSL-KRASG12D transgenic murine model was
previously described (15).
Patient sample collection and preparation
In accordance with IRB #071136X (M. Bouvet), fresh
tumor specimens from patients undergoing routine cancer
surgery were collected in cold RPMI for subsequent PCR and
immunohistochemical preparation and analysis. All patient
identiﬁcation information was removed and all samples
were made anonymous. Patients signed an informed consent
document before their operative procedure, which acknowledged that a portion of the resected tissue would be used for
research.

www.aacrjournals.org

RT-PCR and quantitative PCR
mRNA extraction, puriﬁcation, DNA synthesis, and reverse
trascription (RT) or quantitative (qPCR) primers used are
described in the Supplementary Materials and Methods.
All qPCR data were processed with the relative quantiﬁcation method and plotted as average fold change (SEM,
unless otherwise indicated) in relation to normal tissue,
appropriate untreated, vehicle-treated, or shRNA controls.
CyQUANT direct cell proliferation assay
Analysis of cell growth was conducted according to manufacturer's protocol (Invitrogen). Brieﬂy, cells were plated in
triplicate into 96-well plates at a density of 200 to 500 cells per
well in complete media. Twenty-four hours later, cell media
were changed to 2% serum-containing media and left untreated or treated with indicated reagents. Viable cell number was
measured on days 3 or 8 based upon CyQuant Green ﬂuorescence emission at 525 nm.
Three-dimensional spheroid assay
Analysis of three-dimensional (3D) tumorsphere growth was
conducted as previously described (16). Brieﬂy, cells were
plated into Dulbecco's Modiﬁed Eagle's Medium (DMEM):
F12 (1:1) containing B27 supplement, 10 mg/mL basic ﬁbroblast
growth factor, 10 mg/mL EGF, and 4 mg/mL heparin sulfate.
Cells were grown for 14 to 21 days and spheroids were imaged
with a wide-ﬁeld light microscope.
Soft agar transformation experiments
Analysis of anchorage-independent cell growth was conducted according to the manufacturers' protocol (Cell Biolabs).
Brieﬂy, 96-well plates were prepared with 50 mL per well surface
layers consisting of 0.6% agar resuspended in cell culture
media. An additional 75 mL per well of 0.33% agar cell culture
media containing 5,000 cells was then added to each well,
followed by the addition of 50 mL of cell culture media. Brightﬁeld microscope images were collected at 10 magniﬁcation
with a Nikon TE instrument and colonies were resuspended
and quantiﬁed with Cell Biolabs' CyQuant Green ﬂuorescent
dye at 525 nm.
Orthotopic implantation experiments
Protocols were followed as previously described (17). Details
are given in the Supplementary Materials and Methods section.
For survival analysis, animal health was assessed 3 times per
week and animals were sacriﬁced when they reached a predeﬁned state of premorbidity (i.e., >3 cm tumor diameter and
one of the following: impaired movement, cachexia, or observable ascites accumulation; or impaired movement, cachexia,
and observable ascites accumulation). Kaplan–Meier curves
were plotted for each animal group, and statistical analysis was
conducted with Prism software (GraphPad). Details of sample
processing are given in the Supplementary Materials and
Methods.
Chicken embryo metastasis assay
Fertilized chicken eggs were purchased from McIntire Poultry and incubated for 14 days (37 C, 100% humidity). A 1-cm2

Cancer Res; 72(10) May 15, 2012

2555

Kelber et al.

Figure 1. PEAK1 is overexpressed
in multiple human malignancies
and is an early biomarker for PDAC
development and progression. A,
heatmap of fold change in PEAK1
expression in tumor samples. Data
are publicly available on
Oncomine, and citations are
included in Supplementary Data.
B, immunohistochemistry of
PEAK1 in human PDACs or normal
pancreatic tissue sections (left).
Arrowheads indicate normal ductal
epithelium. Scale bar, 50 mm.
Quantitative analysis of
immunohistochemical staining for
7 normal, 9 grade I, 15 grade II, and
16 grade III human samples by
blind scoring on a scale of 0–3
(right). C, immunohistochemistry
of PEAK1 in normal PDX-1-Cre
control mice (ac, acinar cells; is,
islet) and PanIN 1A/B and 2 from
6 month-old PDX-1-Cre:LSLG12D
mice. Arrowheads
KRAS
indicate normal ductal epithelium
or PanIN lesions. Scale bar, 50 mm.
 
, , and   represent P values
of < 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001,
respectively, as determined by a
one-way ANOVA. IHC,
immunohistochemical.

square window was created in the eggshell to expose the
underlying vasculature. Tumor cells were suspended in sterile
PBS at a concentration of 3  106/mL and 3  105 tumor cells
were injected into one of the chorioallantoic membrane (CAM)
veins. After incubating embryos for another 48 hours, Rhodamine-lectin (Vector Biolabs, 100 mL per chick, 0.5mg/mL) was
injected into the CAM vein. Following appropriate euthanizing
procedures, the chicken brain and liver were removed and
imaged with either a Leica MZFLIII microscope (1.25) or a
Nikon c1-si confocal microscope (10–60).
Immunoprecipitation and Western blotting
All immunoprecipitations and Western blotting were conducted as previously described (12).
Confocal microscopy
Imaging and processing were conducted as described in
Supplementary Materials and Methods.
Statistical analysis
All quantiﬁed data were plotted and analyzed in GraphPad
Prism 5.0 with ANOVA, Student t test, nonlinear regression

2556

Cancer Res; 72(10) May 15, 2012

analysis, or Kaplan–Meier curve analysis. Data are representative of at least 3 independent experiments and are reported
as replicate averages  SEM, unless otherwise indicated.  ,  ,
or  represent P values < 0.05, 0.01, or 0.001, respectively,
unless otherwise noted.

Results
PEAK1 is overexpressed in multiple human malignancies
and is an early biomarker for PDAC development and
progression
Because it is not known whether oncogenic transformation
regulates PEAK1 expression or whether PEAK1 contributes
widely to human malignancies, we ﬁrst sought to determine
the expression proﬁle of PEAK1 in various human cancers in
comparison with normal tissues. PEAK1 expression is significantly upregulated in multiple human tumors in comparison
with normal tissues (Fig. 1A) and shows a strong correlation
with various subcategories of these cancers that are associated
with poor disease prognosis (Supplementary Table S1). No
signiﬁcant changes in PEAK1 mRNA levels were observed
between normal and malignant tissues for bladder, head and
neck, lung, sarcoma, and melanoma tumors. Because the

Cancer Research

KRas-Induced PEAK1 Signaling in Pancreatic Cancer

Figure 2. KRas induces Src-dependent PEAK1 expression in PDAC and other human malignancies. A, qPCR analyses of PEAK1 in oncogenic
KRas-containing PDAC tissues collected from patients BK-13 and BK-14 relative to normal pancreas tissue from the same patients. Error bars, SD over
3 analyses. B, hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining and PEAK1 immunohistochemistry of tissues from patients BK-13 and BK-14. C, heatmap of fold
change in PEAK1 expression in tumor samples with and without oncogenic Ras mutations. Data are publicly available on Oncomine, and citations are
included in Supplementary Data. D, Western blot (WB) analysis for PEAK1 and KRas in HPNE (11, 19) or PDAC cell lines (FG and PANC1). E, quantiﬁcation of
protein (left) and mRNA (right) levels of PEAK1 following administration of indicated pathway inhibitors in HPNE-KRas and PANC1 cells, relative to dimethyl
sulfoxide (DMSO) vehicle control.

mortality and incidence for PDAC are almost equal due to few
diagnostic biomarkers and therapeutic targets, we focused our
subsequent PEAK1 expression analyses on this disease. We
examined changes in PEAK1 protein levels in human PDAC
patient tissue arrays and a murine model of KRas-induced
PanIN (PDX-1-Cre:LSL-KRASG12D; ref. 15). PEAK1 protein
expression was increased in PDAC tissues in comparison with
normal tissues and correlated with grade (Fig. 1B). Furthermore, we observed that PEAK1 expression was elevated in
PanIN lesions (Fig. 1C and Supplementary Table S1), showing
that PEAK1 represents an early biomarker for pancreatic
ductal neoplasia (1, 18).
KRas induces Src-dependent PEAK1 expression in PDAC
and other human malignancies
While the above ﬁndings suggest that PEAK1 is deregulated
during oncogenic reprogramming, the mechanism driving
PEAK1 upregulation remains unclear. Because PanIN and
PDAC progression are nearly always associated with activating
mutations in the KRas oncogene and because PEAK1 is upregulated in PanIN tissues from PDX-1-Cre:LSL-KRASG12D mice,
we tested whether PEAK1 expression correlated with oncogenic Ras mutations in human cancers. RT-PCR, qPCR, and
immunohistochemical analyses of normal pancreas and oncogenic KRas-positive PDAC tissues collected from patients

www.aacrjournals.org

BK-13 and BK-14 after surgical resection showed that PEAK1
is overexpressed in PDAC tissue in conjunction with the
presence of the G12D oncogenic KRas mutant (Fig. 2A and
B and Supplementary Fig. S1A). Furthermore, human cancers
positive for oncogenic KRas or NRas mutations (Fig. 2C) or
HRas-transformed breast epithelial cells (Supplementary Table
S1) showed a signiﬁcant increase in PEAK1 expression. In
agreement with these data, introduction of constitutively active
KRasG12D into human pancreatic nestin-expressing (HPNE;
refs.11, 19) cells or KRas knockdown in established PDAC cell
lines robustly increased or decreased, respectively, PEAK1
protein and mRNA levels (Fig. 2D and Supplementary Fig. S1B).
We subsequently sought to identify the pathway downstream of KRas that induces PEAK1 expression. Pharmacologic
inhibition of phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), mitogen-activated protein (MAP)/ERK kinase (MEK), or Src in HPNE-KRas
and PANC1 cells revealed that PEAK1 expression is dependent
upon Src-mediated transcriptional regulation (Fig. 2E and
Supplementary Fig. S1C, S1D, and S1F). Importantly, suppression of Src kinase in these cells via RNA interference (RNAi)
also reduced PEAK1 expression (Supplementary Fig. S1E).
Taken together, these ﬁndings show that PEAK1 protein
expression is positively regulated by KRas/Src signaling in
human malignancies and human PDAC primary samples and
cell lines.

Cancer Res; 72(10) May 15, 2012

2557

Kelber et al.

Figure 3. PEAK1 is necessary for
KRas-induced anchoragedependent and -independent
growth of pancreatic cancer cells.
Analysis of viable cell number in
HPNE or HPNE-KRas cells
containing control or PEAK1
shRNAs (A); HPNE-KRas cells
containing control or a 30 UTRtargeting PEAK1 shRNA with or
without PEAK1 (B); or HPNE cells
transiently transfected with, GFP,
GFP-PEAK1, GFP-C1, or GFPDATP constructs (C). D, analysis of
viable cell number in PDAC cell
lines (FG and PANC1) containing
control, PEAK1, or KRas shRNAs.
E, quantiﬁed 3D spheroid
suspension growth of HPNE-KRas
(insets are representative images
for each group) containing control
or PEAK1 shRNAs. Scale bar, 200
mm. F, quantiﬁed soft agar growth
of HPNE-KRas cells containing
control or a 30 UTR-targeting
PEAK1 shRNA with or without
overexpressed PEAK1 (insets are
representative images for each
group). Scale bar, 100 mm.  ,  , and

represent P values of < 0.05,
0.01, and 0.001, respectively, as
determined by a one- or two-way
ANOVA. rfu, relative ﬂuorescence
units.

PEAK1 is necessary for KRas-induced anchoragedependent and -independent expansion of pancreatic
cancer cells
Consistent with the role of KRas in driving PEAK1 expression, PEAK1 was necessary and sufﬁcient for KRas-induced
anchorage-dependent expansion in HPNE cells (Fig. 3A and B
and Supplementary Fig. S2A and S2B). Importantly, overexpression of wild-type PEAK1 or a C-terminal truncation
mutant (C1) containing the kinase domain was sufﬁcient to
induce HPNE cell expansion under anchorage-dependent conditions. Mutational inactivation of the ATP-binding site
abrogated this effect, showing that PEAK1 kinase activity
(12) is critical for its effect in these assays (Fig. 3C and
Supplementary Fig. S2C). Conversely, depletion of KRas or
PEAK1 from FG and PANC1 PDAC cell lines (Fig. 2D and
Supplementary Fig. S2A) inhibited anchorage-dependent cell
expansion (Fig. 3D). In addition, we discovered that PEAK1
is essential for KRas-induced formation and expansion of 3D
tumorspheres (Fig. 3E and Supplementary Fig. S2D), which is
an in vitro measure of tumor-initiating potential (16). We
further analyzed the ability of PEAK1 overexpression and
knockdown to modulate HPNE cell transformation, as analyzed by anchorage-independent growth. As shown in Fig.
3F, HPNE-KRas cells overexpressing PEAK1 formed more
colonies in soft agar, and these colonies were also larger.
PEAK1 knockdown signiﬁcantly reduced the ability of

2558

Cancer Res; 72(10) May 15, 2012

HPNE-KRas cells to grow under these conditions. Importantly, this effect was rescued by overexpressing PEAK1.
PEAK1 is necessary for tumor formation, progression,
and metastasis in vivo
The above results strongly suggested that PEAK1 might
regulate pancreatic cancer growth in vivo. Therefore, we next
investigated whether altering PEAK1 expression could interfere with PDAC tumor formation and metastasis in vivo. In
these studies, FG cells were measured for their ability to form
tumors and metastasize with a preclinical orthotopic implantation mouse model of PDACs (Fig. 4A; refs. 17, 20). PEAK1
knockdown signiﬁcantly reduced tumor formation (Fig. 4B and
Supplementary Fig. S3A and S3B), whereas PEAK1 overexpression caused a signiﬁcant increase in tumorigenesis in vivo
(Supplementary Fig. S3C–S3E). Furthermore, PEAK1 knockdown suppressed metastasis to multiple sites and increased
animal survival compared with animals implanted with control cells expressing PEAK1 (Fig. 4C and D and Supplementary Fig. S3F). Notably, the median survival of control
animals was 64 days, whereas median survival of the
PEAK1-depleted group was 97 days (P ¼ 0.0022; Fig. 4D).
In support of these data, depletion of PEAK1 in HPNEKRasG12D cells abrogated liver and brain metastasis (Fig.
4E and Supplementary Fig. S3G) in the chicken embryo (21).
These data are also consistent with our observations that

Cancer Research

KRas-Induced PEAK1 Signaling in Pancreatic Cancer

Figure 4. PEAK1 is necessary for tumor formation, progression, and metastasis in vivo. A, schematic of orthotopic implantation model of pancreatic cancer and
experimental design. B, parental, shCntrl, or shPEAK1 FG cells were orthotopically implanted into the pancreata of athymic mice (n ¼ 11 per group) and
imaged over 6 weeks to assess tumor growth. C, normalized metastatic load was calculated as described in Supplementary Materials and Methods and
plotted for indicated tissues after harvesting and ﬂuorescence imaging analysis. D, Kaplan–Meier curves were generated to analyze statistical signiﬁcance of
animal survival as described in Materials and Methods. E, PEAK1-mediated metastasis was further assessed by injecting HPNE-KRas shCntrl or
shPEAK1 cells into the chicken CAM veins. The liver was removed and imaged 48 hours later with wide-ﬁeld (top) and confocal (bottom) microscopy
to quantify cell metastasis (right). Images are representative of 5 chickens in each group. Scale bar, 2 mm (top) and 200 mm (bottom). F, Tukey plot of normalized
PEAK1 gene expression (downloaded from Oncomine) in primary tumor samples in comparison with lymph node (LN) and liver metastases from patients with
PDAC; citations are included in the Supplementary Data.  ,   , and    represent P values of < 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001, respectively, as determined by one-way
ANOVA or Student t test (F).

PEAK1 levels are signiﬁcantly increased in the highly metastatic FGM cell line derived from FG cells (Supplementary
Fig. S3H) and in metastatic foci originating from human
PDAC and other cancers in comparison with the primary
tumor of origin (Fig. 4F, Supplementary Fig. S3I and Table
S1; ref. 22). Together, these data show an essential role for
PEAK1 during PDAC growth and metastasis in vivo.
Suppression of ErbB2 in PDAC cells drives
PEAK1-dependent tumor formation in vivo
Similar to PEAK1, both ErbB2 and Src are upregulated in
human PDAC downstream of oncogenic KRas (Fig. 5A and B

www.aacrjournals.org

and Supplementary Fig. S4A–S4E; refs. 23–25). While Src is
known to cooperate with KRas during pancreatic neoplasia (4),
the role of ErbB2 in PDAC remains unclear (1, 2). For these
reasons, we initially sought to determine whether there was a
functional relationship between the coinduction of PEAK1 and
ErbB2 tyrosine kinases in PDACs. Surprisingly, silencing ErbB2
(Supplementary Fig. S4F) in FG cells signiﬁcantly increased
orthotopic tumor formation in mice (Fig. 5C and Supplementary Fig. S4G). Notably, this response was associated with
increased PEAK1 expression in vivo (Fig. 5D) and in vitro
(Fig. 5E and Supplementary Fig. S4H), suggesting that PEAK1
upregulation compensated for the loss of ErbB2 to drive

Cancer Res; 72(10) May 15, 2012

2559

Kelber et al.

Figure 5. PEAK1 compensates for
ErbB2 loss in vivo via Src signaling.
A, heatmap and average PEAK1,
ErbB2, and Src expression
patterns in PDAC and normal
pancreatic tissue. Data are publicly
available on Oncomine, and
citations are included in
Supplementary Data. B, qPCR
analysis of indicated genes in
PDAC tissue from patients BK-13
and BK-14 in relation to normal
pancreas tissue from the same
patient. Error bars represent SD
over 3 analyses. C, average
pancreatic tumor mass was
measured 6 weeks after orthotopic
implantation of FG cells, containing
the indicated shRNAs into athymic
mice. D, Western blot (WB) analysis
of PEAK1 and ErbB2 protein levels
from representative tumor lysates.
E, Western blot analysis of
indicated proteins and
phosphoproteins from FG cells
containing the indicated shRNAs.
F, coimmunoprecipitation (IP) and
Western blot analysis of an
endogenous, active Src/PEAK1/
ErbB2 signaling complex from FG
cells transduced with shCntrl or
shPEAK1 constructs. G, Western
blot and RT-PCR analyses of
PEAK1 levels in FG shCntrl and
shErbB2 cells following dasatinib
inhibition of Src kinase. H,
quantiﬁcation of indicated protein
or phosphoprotein levels in shCntrl
and shErbB2 lysates from FG cells
transiently transfected with siCntrl
or siSrc (pool) oligonucleotides.
 
, , and   represent P values
of < 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001,
respectively, as determined by a
one-way ANOVA or Student
t test (A).

tumor formation. Indeed, silencing PEAK1 in ErbB2-depleted FG cells fully abrogated tumor formation beyond that of
PEAK1 knockdown alone (Fig. 5C–E and Supplementary Fig.
S4G and S4H). These ﬁndings are also consistent with our
data showing that PEAK1 overexpression in FG cells
increases tumor formation (Supplementary Fig. S3C–S3E).
These data show that ErbB2 suppression in PDAC cells
potentiates tumor formation by upregulating PEAK1 protein
levels. Interestingly, overexpression of a constitutively active
form of ErbB2 (NeuT) in FG cells did not alter PEAK1
expression or the tumorigenic potential of these cells in
vivo (Supplementary Fig. S4I–S4L). This result suggests that
ErbB2 is a permissive factor in PDACs and that oncogenic
programs active in this disease are selectively sensitive to
decreased ErbB2 levels.

2560

Cancer Res; 72(10) May 15, 2012

PEAK1 modulates Src and ErbB2 kinase activities and
complex assembly
PEAK1 knockdown inhibited ErbB2 kinase activity as indicated by decreased phosphorylation of Y1248 and Y877 (Fig. 5E
and Supplementary Fig. S4H; refs. 26, 27). ErbB2-Y877 is a
reported Src substrate site that potentiates ErbB2 autophosphorylation on other tyrosine residues such as Y1248 and
enhances its transforming potential (26). Therefore, these
ﬁndings suggest that PEAK1 can regulate Src activity toward
ErbB2 to modulate its kinase activity. In this regard, PEAK1
knockdown potently inhibited Src kinase activity and the
assembly of an active Src/ErbB2 kinase complex (Fig. 5E and
F and Supplementary Fig. S4H). Furthermore, active Src and
ErbB2 co-precipitated with PEAK1 from PDAC cell lysates
indicating that all 3 proteins participate in a molecular

Cancer Research

KRas-Induced PEAK1 Signaling in Pancreatic Cancer

Figure 6. Src/PEAK1/ErbB2
signaling drives trastuzumab (Tzb)
and gemcitabine resistance in
pancreatic cancer cells. A, qPCR
analysis of PEAK1 (left), ErbB2
(middle), and Src (right) in indicated
cells lines following Src, ErbB2, or
PEAK1 inhibition relative to the
appropriate vehicle-treated or
shRNA controls. Western blot
analysis (B) for indicated proteins in
or viable cell number analysis (C) of
PANC1 cells containing shCntrl or
shPEAK1 constructs following 72hour treatment with 1 mg/mL
trastuzumab or left untreated. D,
analysis of viable cell number in
HPNE-KRas cells containing control
or a 30 UTR-targeting PEAK1 shRNA,
with or without PEAK1 treated with
1 mg/mL trastuzumab or left
untreated. Dose–response analyses
of trastuzumab (E) and gemcitabine
(F) effects on FG shCntrl or shPEAK1
cell number.  , P value of < 0.05,
respectively, as determined by a
two-way ANOVA. rfu, relative
ﬂuorescence units.

complex (Fig. 5F and Supplementary Fig. S4M). Because KRas
induces PEAK1 expression in a Src-dependent manner (Fig. 2E
and Supplementary Fig. S1C–S1F), we further hypothesized
that PEAK1 upregulation following ErbB2 depletion may also
occur via an Src-dependent mechanism. Pharmacologic or
RNAi inhibition of Src in FG cells with and without ErbB2
suppressed PEAK1 expression at both the transcript and
protein levels (Fig. 5G and H). Taken together, our ﬁndings
show that KRas activation induces the upregulation of Src,
PEAK1, and ErbB2 to form a feed-forward, self-sustaining
tyrosine kinase ampliﬁcation loop that promotes PDAC
growth and metastasis.
Src/PEAK1/ErbB2 signaling drives trastuzumab and
gemcitabine resistance in pancreatic cancer cells
Because Src and ErbB2 inhibitors are currently in clinical
trials for pancreatic cancer and we have shown that inhibition
of Src activity and ErbB2 expression modulate PEAK1 protein
levels, we sought to determine whether Src (dasatinib) or
ErbB2 (trastuzumab) inhibition might elicit compensatory
expression of PEAK1, Src, and/or ErbB2 genes. Importantly,
inhibition of PEAK1 expression did not induce compensatory
transcription of Src or ErbB2 (Fig. 6A). In contrast, whereas
dasatinib inhibited PEAK1 expression, it signiﬁcantly
increased transcription of both ErbB2 and Src (Fig. 6A, middle
and right). This compensatory upregulation of ErbB2 in
response to dasatinib may have important clinical implications. However, we show here that increased ErbB2 activity
above endogenous levels in PDAC cells does not promote
increased tumor growth (Supplementary Fig. S4I–S4L). Therefore, as dasatinib potently blocks both Src activity and PEAK1
expression, even in the context of upregulated ErbB2, it is likely

www.aacrjournals.org

that this therapeutic approach will provide some beneﬁt to
patients (4, 9). On the other hand, directly inhibiting ErbB2
expression and function with trastuzumab alone may not be a
viable therapeutic option because it induced PEAK1 expression (Fig. 6A, left, and 6B), which in turn, can drive Src activity
and PDAC growth (Figs. 5C–E and 6B, and Supplementary Fig.
S4G and S4H). Taken together, these data suggest that targeting PEAK1 may be a preferred method for treating PDAC as it
minimizes compensatory signaling through Src and ErbB2
kinases.
The above results do suggest that dual inhibition of both
ErbB2 and PEAK1 may further overcome trastuzumab resistance in PDAC preclinical and clinical studies. Trastuzumab
(Herceptin, Genentech Inc.) acts to cause internalization,
degradation, and inactivation of the ErbB2 receptor (28) and
is currently being evaluated in combination with gemcitabine,
which is the standard chemotherapy given to patients with
PDAC. However, studies to date suggest that trastuzumab
offers little beneﬁt alone or in combination with gemcitabine
(2, 6, 7, 29). These data, combined with the fact that PEAK1 is
upregulated in trastuzumab-resistant PDAC cell lines and
patients with ampliﬁed ErbB2 levels (Supplementary Fig.
S5A and S5B), led us to investigate whether the ineffectiveness
of trastuzumab-based therapies could be because of a PEAK1/
Src compensation mechanism following ErbB2 suppression.
Consistent with shRNA knockdown of ErbB2 in FG cells,
trastuzumab treatment of PANC1 cells (a trastuzumab-resistant line; ref. 6) reduced ErbB2 expression signiﬁcantly
and increased PEAK1 expression, Src activity, and robust
Y877 phosphorylation of the residual ErbB2 protein (Fig.
6B). PEAK1 knockdown abrogated this effect (Fig. 6B) and
greatly sensitized these cells to trastuzumab (Fig. 6C). While

Cancer Res; 72(10) May 15, 2012

2561

Kelber et al.

overexpression of PEAK1 in HPNE-KRas cells did not signiﬁcantly change their response to trastuzumab, PEAK1 knockdown enabled trastuzumab to elicit growth-inhibitory effects
under anchorage-dependent conditions (Fig. 6D). Rescuing
PEAK1 expression in the HPNE-KRas cells reversed this effect,
causing these cells to regain their trastuzumab-resistant phenotype (Fig. 6D). Furthermore, PEAK1 knockdown reduced the
IC50 values of trastuzumab (Fig. 6E) and a commercially
available ErbB2-targeting antibody (Supplementary Fig. S5C)
by approximately 100- and 10-fold, respectively, whereas PEAK1
overexpression in FG cells made them nonresponsive to trastuzumab in vitro (Supplementary Fig. S5D). These ﬁndings
support a mechanism by which elevated PEAK1/Src signaling
compensates for loss of ErbB2 function in PDAC and, therefore,
contributes to resistance of ErbB2-targeted therapies.
As mentioned earlier, the standard therapy regimen for
patients with metastatic pancreatic cancer is gemcitabine.
However, most patients with advanced metastatic disease
show little response to this treatment (1, 30). Because Src
activity has recently been identiﬁed as a contributing factor
to gemcitabine resistance in pancreatic cancer (9) and we
show that Src inhibition with dasatinib sensitized FG cells to
gemcitabine (Supplementary Fig. S5E), we reasoned that
PEAK1 suppression may also sensitize PDAC cells to growth
inhibition by gemcitabine treatment. In this regard,
shPEAK1 FG cells were 10 times more sensitive to gemcitabine treatment in vitro than in control cells (Fig. 6F). In
agreement with these data, previous studies have shown a
signiﬁcant increase in PEAK1 expression in patients with
lung cancer who are resistant to gemcitabine treatment
(Supplementary Fig. S5F and Table S1). Taken together with
our earlier results showing that PEAK1 mediates the formation and function of a triple-kinase complex between Src,
PEAK1, and ErbB2 to promote PDAC progression, these
ﬁndings suggest that the development of combination therapies that include PEAK1 inhibition or suppression may
provide maximum beneﬁt for patients.

Discussion
We originally identiﬁed PEAK1 as a tyrosine phosphorylated
protein enriched in the pseudopodium of migrating cells
(12, 31). PEAK1 localizes to integrin-mediated focal adhesions
and actin stress ﬁbers, where it regulates the cytoskeleton and
shape changes necessary for cell migration. Here, we report
that PEAK1 also regulates cancer cell growth and progression.
Although it is not yet known how PEAK1 regulates cancer
growth and cancer cell motility, PEAK1 can receive input
signals from integrin adhesions and growth factor receptors,
which send vital proliferation, survival, and motility information from the surrounding extracellular environment to the
cell's interior (32–34). In this regard, we have previously shown
that growth factors promote PEAK1 tyrosine phosphorylation
in a Src-dependent manner (12, 31). Also, PEAK1 overexpression in cancer cells is sufﬁcient to promote extracellular
signal–regulated kinase (ERK) activation and phosphorylation
of the focal adhesion proteins p130CAS and paxillin (12, 31).
Together, these ﬁndings suggest that PEAK1 is an important

2562

Cancer Res; 72(10) May 15, 2012

cytoskeletal regulator that controls cancer cell growth and
migration.
PEAK1 is upregulated in many solid tumors and blood-born
cancers (Fig. 1A and Supplementary Table S1). This suggests
that PEAK1 plays fundamental roles in tumor progression
downstream of the diverse oncogenic insults found in human
malignancies. While the precise role of PEAK1 in these malignancies needs to be deﬁned further, we show here that in
PDACs, activating mutations in the KRas oncogene drive the
aberrant upregulation of PEAK1 via Src-dependent transcriptional regulation. This can affect cancer progression in 2 ways.
First, PEAK1 upregulation increases Src kinase activity above
that already induced by KRas activation (Fig. 5E and Supplementary Fig. S4H). PEAK1 has a highly conserved Src consensus
phosphorylation site and Src SH2–binding domain at Y665.
Thus, it is possible that KRas drives the initial Src activity that
promotes both increased PEAK1 protein expression and the
phosphorylation of Y665. We suspect that this increases Src
binding to PEAK1-Y665 via its SH2 domain, which in turn
stabilizes Src in the open kinase-active conformation, and
further promotes tumorigenesis (ref. 35; Supplementary Fig. S6).
Second, PEAK1 mediates Src/ErbB2 binding and ErbB2
phosphorylation at Y877 (Fig. 5E and F and Supplementary
Fig. S4H and S4M). Phosphorylation of ErbB2-Y877 is Srcdependent and can enhance the oncogenic potential of ErbB2
(26). Therefore, it is possible that enhanced ErbB2 activation,
by PEAK1/Src signaling, can also contribute to cancer growth
and progression (Supplementary Fig. S6). If this is the case,
depletion of ErbB2 should reduce tumorigenesis. Surprisingly
though, depletion of ErbB2 protein from PDAC cells enhanced
tumorigenesis in a PEAK1/Src-dependent fashion (Fig. 5C–E
and Supplementary Fig. S4G and S4H). Furthermore, overexpression of the constitutively active NeuT receptor did not
modulate PEAK1 expression or increase tumor growth (Supplementary Fig. S4I–S4L). This suggests that elevating ErbB2
activation above endogenous levels in pancreatic cancer cells
does not further contribute to tumor growth and that ErbB2
overexpression is permissive during later stages of PDACs (36).
Interestingly, it has been previously reported that oncogenes
known to contribute to tumorigenesis in some tumor types have
no phenotype when overexpressed in other cancers (37, 38).
Furthermore, it will be important that future studies investigate
the role of ErbB2 during early pancreatic neoplasia. One explanation of these results is that the loss of ErbB2 protein from the
PEAK1/Src kinase complex makes this active complex available
to target new substrates (such as other growth factor receptors
or intracellular effector molecules) that can also drive cancer.
Alternatively, ErbB2 inactivation could inhibit an unidentiﬁed
negative feedback pathway that normally permits or holds
PEAK1/Src activity in check within tumor cells. In this regard,
we show that ErbB2 suppression via RNAi or trastuzumab
increases PEAK1 expression and Src signaling, leading to sustained phosphorylation of the residual ErbB2 protein (Figs. 5E–
H and 6A and Supplementary Fig. S4H). Yet, it is still possible
that other feedback mechanisms are in action, and the speciﬁc
protumorigenic mechanism(s) of PEAK1/Src hyperactivation
downstream of ErbB2 inactivation as well as the role of PEAK1
in other cancers need to be further elucidated. In any case, our

Cancer Research

KRas-Induced PEAK1 Signaling in Pancreatic Cancer

ﬁndings clearly show that PEAK1 is necessary for PDAC progression whether or not ErbB2 is present.
Because our data suggest that ErbB2 plays a permissive,
oncogene-sensing role in PDAC, our ﬁndings that trastuzumab resistance results from compensatory PEAK1/Src signaling have important implications for this disease. The
therapeutic effectiveness of trastuzumab is currently being
tested in human PDAC clinical trials in combination with
gemcitabine (2, 6, 7, 29). However, the majority of patients
show no beneﬁt from trastuzumab treatment. Thus, our
ﬁnding that PEAK1/Src signaling can compensate for the
loss of ErbB2 activity may provide a plausible explanation for
the poor clinical response to trastuzumab and are in agreement with previous studies. In our studies, trastuzumab
initiated compensatory PEAK1-dependent signaling (Fig.
6A–E and Supplementary Fig. S5A–S5D). Thus, PEAK1 may
be a preferred target against which novel therapies can be
developed for patients with PDACs, either alone or in
combination with existing therapies. Finally, PEAK1 inhibition sensitized PDAC cells to gemcitabine treatment (Fig.
6F). Because gemcitabine represents the standard of care for
patients with PDAC, therapeutic interventions that target
PEAK1 may improve patient outcome in combination with
gemcitabine therapy.
In summary, KRas-induced PEAK1 mediates pancreatic
cancer growth, metastasis, and therapy resistance via activation of Src kinase. While many factors contribute to the
pathogenesis of PDACs, a detailed understanding of the molecular components, such as PEAK1, that can drive cancer progression, metastasis, and therapy resistance may lead to new
avenues for disease diagnosis and treatment.

Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interests were disclosed.

Authors' Contributions
Conception and design: J.A. Kelber, S. Kaushal, Y. Wang, R.L. Klemke
Development of methodology: J.A. Kelber, T. Reno, S. Kaushal, C. Metildi, T.
Wright, K. Stoletov, E. Mose, Y. Wang, A.M. Lowy, R.L. Klemke
Acquisition of data (provided animals, acquired and managed patients,
provided facilities, etc.): J.A. Kelber, T. Reno, S. Kaushal, C. Metildi, T. Wright,
K. Stoletov, J.M. Weems, F.D. Park, E. Mose, Y. Wang, A.M. Lowy, M. Bouvet, R.L.
Klemke
Analysis and interpretation of data (e.g., statistical analysis, biostatistics,
computational analysis): J.A. Kelber, S. Kaushal, T. Wright, A.M. Lowy, R.L.
Klemke
Writing, review, and/or revision of the manuscript: J.A. Kelber, T. Reno, C.
Metildi, K. Stoletov, J.M. Weems, R.M. Hoffman, R.L. Klemke
Administrative, technical, or material support (i.e., reporting or organizing data, constructing databases): J.A. Kelber, T. Wright, R.L. Klemke
Study supervision: J.A. Kelber, R.L. Klemke

Acknowledgments
The authors thank members of the Klemke, Bouvet, and Lowy laboratories
and Dr. Peter Gray for instructive feedback and discussions about the manuscript. The authors thank Dr. Cynthia Snyder who assisted with the histopathology analysis of tumor sections. The authors also thank Elizabeth Hampton,
Ryan Matson, and Tiffany Taylor for assistance with molecular biology and cell
culture protocols.

Grant Support
This work was supported by the NIH-IRACDA (NIH - Institutional Research
and Academic Career Development Award) Postdoctoral Fellowship GM06852
(J.A. Kelber) and NIH grants CA097022 and CA129231 (R.L. Klemke), CA132971
(M. Bouvet) and CA137692 (A.M. Lowy).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of
page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in
accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
Received October 31, 2011; revised February 24, 2012; accepted February 24,
2012; published OnlineFirst May 16, 2012.

References
1.

2.

3.
4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

Hezel AF, Kimmelman AC, Stanger BZ, Bardeesy N, Depinho RA.
Genetics and biology of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Genes
Dev 2006;20:1218–49.
Kern SE, Shi C, Hruban RH. The complexity of pancreatic ductal
cancers and multidimensional strategies for therapeutic targeting.
J Pathol 2011;223:295–306.
Ghaneh P, Costello E, Neoptolemos JP. Biology and management of
pancreatic cancer. Gut 2007;56:1134–52.
Shields DJ, Murphy EA, Desgrosellier JS, Mielgo A, Lau SK, Barnes LA,
et al. Oncogenic Ras/Src cooperativity in pancreatic neoplasia. Oncogene 2011;30:2123–34.
Larbouret C, Robert B, Navarro-Teulon I, Thezenas S, Ladjemi MZ,
Morisseau S, et al. In vivo therapeutic synergism of anti-epidermal
growth factor receptor and anti-HER2 monoclonal antibodies
against pancreatic carcinomas. Clin Cancer Res 2007;13:
3356–62.
Kimura K, Sawada T, Komatsu M, Inoue M, Muguruma K, Nishihara T,
et al. Antitumor effect of trastuzumab for pancreatic cancer with high
HER-2 expression and enhancement of effect by combined therapy
with gemcitabine. Clin Cancer Res 2006;12:4925–32.
Pratesi G, Petrangolini G, Tortoreto M, Addis A, Zunino F, Calcaterra C,
et al. Antitumor efﬁcacy of trastuzumab in nude mice orthotopically
xenografted with human pancreatic tumor cells expressing low levels
of HER-2/neu. J Immunother 2008;31:537–44.
Buchler P, Reber HA, Buchler MC, Roth MA, Buchler MW, Friess H,
et al. Therapy for pancreatic cancer with a recombinant humanized
anti-HER2 antibody (herceptin). J Gastrointest Surg 2001;5:
139–46.

www.aacrjournals.org

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

Nagaraj NS, Washington MK, Merchant NB. Combined blockade of
Src kinase and epidermal growth factor receptor with gemcitabine
overcomes STAT3-mediated resistance of inhibition of pancreatic
tumor growth. Clin Cancer Res 2011;17:483–93.
Fleming JB, Shen GL, Holloway SE, Davis M, Brekken RA. Molecular
consequences of silencing mutant K-ras in pancreatic cancer cells:
justiﬁcation for K-ras-directed therapy. Mol Cancer Res 2005;3:413–23.
Zhao S, Wang Y, Cao L, Ouellette MM, Freeman JW. Expression of
oncogenic K-ras and loss of Smad4 cooperate to induce the expression of EGFR and to promote invasion of immortalized human pancreas ductal cells. Int J Cancer 2010;127:2076–87.
Wang Y, Kelber JA, Tran Cao HS, Cantin GT, Lin R, Wang W, et al.
Pseudopodium-enriched atypical kinase 1 regulates the cytoskeleton
and cancer progression [corrected]. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2010;107:10920–5.
Manning G, Whyte DB, Martinez R, Hunter T, Sudarsanam S. The
protein kinase complement of the human genome. Science 2002;298:
1912–34.
Brandt R, Wong AM, Hynes NE. Mammary glands reconstituted with
Neu/ErbB2 transformed HC11 cells provide a novel orthotopic tumor
model for testing anti-cancer agents. Oncogene 2001;20:5459–65.
Hingorani SR, Petricoin EF, Maitra A, Rajapakse V, King C, Jacobetz
MA, et al. Preinvasive and invasive ductal pancreatic cancer and its
early detection in the mouse. Cancer Cell 2003;4:437–50.
Hermann PC, Huber SL, Herrler T, Aicher A, Ellwart JW, Guba M, et al.
Distinct populations of cancer stem cells determine tumor growth and
metastatic activity in human pancreatic cancer. Cell Stem Cell 2007;1:
313–23.

Cancer Res; 72(10) May 15, 2012

2563

Kelber et al.

17. Snyder CS, Kaushal S, Kono Y, Cao HS, Hoffman RM, Bouvet M.
Complementarity of ultrasound and ﬂuorescence imaging in an orthotopic mouse model of pancreatic cancer. BMC Cancer 2009;9:106.
18. Harsha HC, Kandasamy K, Ranganathan P, Rani S, Ramabadran S,
Gollapudi S, et al. A compendium of potential biomarkers of pancreatic
cancer. PLoS Med 2009;6:e1000046.
19. Carriere C, Seeley ES, Goetze T, Longnecker DS, Korc M. The Nestin
progenitor lineage is the compartment of origin for pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2007;104:4437–42.
20. Hoffman RM. The multiple uses of ﬂuorescent proteins to visualize
cancer in vivo. Nat Rev Cancer 2005;5:796–806.
21. Deryugina EI, Quigley JP. Chick embryo chorioallantoic membrane
model systems to study and visualize human tumor cell metastasis.
Histochem Cell Biol 2008;130:1119–30.
22. Harada T, Chelala C, Bhakta V, Chaplin T, Caulee K, Baril P, et al.
Genome-wide DNA copy number analysis in pancreatic cancer using
high-density single nucleotide polymorphism arrays. Oncogene
2008;27:1951–60.
23. Badea L, Herlea V, Dima SO, Dumitrascu T, Popescu I. Combined
gene expression analysis of whole-tissue and microdissected pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma identiﬁes genes speciﬁcally overexpressed in tumor epithelia. Hepatogastroenterology 2008;55:
2016–27.
24. Day JD, Digiuseppe JA, Yeo C, Lai-Goldman M, Anderson SM, Goodman SN, et al. Immunohistochemical evaluation of HER-2/neu expression in pancreatic adenocarcinoma and pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasms. Hum Pathol 1996;27:119–24.
25. Lutz MP, Esser IB, Flossmann-Kast BB, Vogelmann R, Luhrs H, Friess
H, et al. Overexpression and activation of the tyrosine kinase Src in
human pancreatic carcinoma. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
1998;243:503–8.
26. Marcotte R, Zhou L, Kim H, Roskelly CD, Muller WJ. c-Src associates
with ErbB2 through an interaction between catalytic domains and

2564

Cancer Res; 72(10) May 15, 2012

27.

28.
29.

30.

31.
32.
33.
34.

35.
36.
37.

38.

confers enhanced transforming potential. Mol Cell Biol 2009;29:
5858–71.
Muthuswamy SK, Gilman M, Brugge JS. Controlled dimerization of
ErbB receptors provides evidence for differential signaling by homoand heterodimers. Mol Cell Biol 1999;19:6845–57.
Kruser TJ, Wheeler DL. Mechanisms of resistance to HER family
targeting antibodies. Exp Cell Res 2010;316:1083–100.
Safran H, Iannitti D, Ramanathan R, Schwartz JD, Steinhoff M,
Nauman C, et al. Herceptin and gemcitabine for metastatic pancreatic cancers that overexpress HER-2/neu. Cancer Invest 2004;
22:706–12.
Collisson EA, Sadanandam A, Olson P, Gibb WJ, Truitt M, Gu S, et al.
Subtypes of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma and their differing
responses to therapy. Nat Med 2011;17:500–3.
Kelber JA, Klemke RL. PEAK1, a novel kinase target in the ﬁght against
cancer. Oncotarget 2010;1:219–23.
Ridley AJ. Life at the leading edge. Cell 2011;145:1012–22.
Rathinam R, Berrier A, Alahari SK. Role of Rho GTPases and their
regulators in cancer progression. Front Biosci 2011;17:2561–71.
Linding R, Jensen LJ, Pasculescu A, Olhovsky M, Colwill K, Bork P,
et al. NetworKIN: a resource for exploring cellular phosphorylation
networks. Nucleic Acids Res 2008;36:D695–9.
Lu XL, Cao X, Liu XY, Jiao BH. Recent progress of Src SH2 and SH3
inhibitors as anticancer agents. Curr Med Chem 2010;17:1117–24.
Bardeesy N, DePinho RA. Pancreatic cancer biology and genetics. Nat
Rev Cancer 2002;2:897–909.
Haigis KM, Kendall KR, Wang Y, Cheung A, Haigis MC, Glickman JN,
et al. Differential effects of oncogenic K-Ras and N-Ras on proliferation, differentiation and tumor progression in the colon. Nat Genet
2008;40:600–8.
Hann A, Gruner A, Chen Y, Gress TM, Buchholz M. Comprehensive
analysis of cellular galectin-3 reveals no consistent oncogenic function
in pancreatic cancer cells. PLoS One 2011;6:e20859.

Cancer Research

