Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 24

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Identification of myeloproliferative neoplasm drug agents via
predictive simulation modeling: assessing responsiveness with
micro-environment derived cytokines
Susumu S. Kobayashi1,*, Shireen Vali2, Ansu Kumar3, Neeraj Singh3, Taher Abbasi2,
Peter P. Sayeski4,*
1

Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center/Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA

2

Cellworks Group, Inc., San Jose, CA, USA

3

Cellworks Research India Pvt Ltd., Cellworks Group Inc., Bangalore, India

4

Department of Physiology and Functional Genomics, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL, USA

*

These authors have contributed equally and share senior authorship

Correspondence to: Peter P. Sayeski, email: psayeski@ufl.edu
Susumu S. Kobayashi, email: skobayas@bidmc.harvard.edu
Keywords: predictive modeling, simulated signaling, signal transduction, JaK kinase
Received: December 18, 2015     Accepted: March 10, 2016     Published: April 1, 2016

ABSTRACT
Previous studies have shown that the bone marrow micro-environment supports
the myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN) phenotype including via the production
of cytokines that can induce resistance to frontline MPN therapies. However, the
mechanisms by which this occurs are poorly understood. Moreover, the ability to
rapidly identify drug agents that can act as adjuvants to existing MPN frontline
therapies is virtually non-existent. Here, using a novel predictive simulation approach,
we sought to determine the effect of various drug agents on MPN cell lines, both with
and without the micro-environment derived inflammatory cytokines. We first created
individual simulation models for two representative MPN cell lines; HEL and SET-2,
based on their genomic mutation and copy number variation (CNV) data. Running
computational simulations on these virtual cell line models, we identified a synergistic
effect of two drug agents on cell proliferation and viability; namely, the Jak2 kinase
inhibitor, G6, and the Bcl-2 inhibitor, ABT737. IL-6 did not show any impact on the
cells due to the predicted lack of IL-6 signaling within these cells. Interestingly,
TNFα increased the sensitivity of the single drug agents and their use in combination
while IFNγ decreased the sensitivity. In summary, this study predictively identified
two drug agents that reduce MPN cell viability via independent mechanisms that was
prospectively validated. Moreover, their efficacy is either potentiated or inhibited, by
some of the micro-environment derived cytokines. Lastly, this study has validated the
use of this simulation based technology to prospectively determine such responses.

physical support, as well as a number of soluble factors,
that serve to enhance neoplastic cell growth. The physical
support is in the form of direct cell-cell contact and comes
via the interaction of various extracellular proteins such
as cadherins and growth factor receptors. The soluble, or
paracrine factors, include various combinations of growth
factors, cytokines, and/or chemokines, that similarly
enhance neoplastic growth. Moreover, not only does the
tumor micro-environment support neoplastic cell growth,
but it also promotes resistance to eventual therapeutic drug

INTRODUCTION
The tumor micro-environment is a complex system
of host cells that work, inadvertently, to promote the
growth of neoplastic cells. Host cells within a typical
tumor micro-environment include fibroblasts, endothelial
cells, and immune cells [1, 2]. Within the bone marrow,
the tumor micro-environment also includes osteoblasts,
adipocytes, and various hematopoietic cells [3]. In the
bone marrow, the micro-environment provides both the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

35989

Oncotarget

agents [1, 4-6]. As such, therapeutic regimens may be most
effective when the neoplastic cells themselves are directly
targeted with one drug and the tumor micro-environment
is targeted with another.
The
Philadelphia
chromosome
negative
myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) encompass
polycythemia vera (PV), essential thrombocythemia
(ET), and myelofibrosis (MF). There are approximately
22 cases of PV, 24 cases of ET, and 1.46 cases of
myelofibrosis for every 100,000 people, which amount
to approximately 68,000 patients with PV, 74,000 with
ET, and 4,500 with MF in the United States [7]. MPNs
are characterized by similar pathological syndromes
including excess production of blood cells from the bone
marrow, pruritus, splenomegaly, and extramedullary
hematopoiesis. Jak2 somatic mutations are found in
about 95% of all PV patients and more than half of all
ET and MF patients. Current frontline therapies for MPN
include cyto-reductive agents such as hydroxyurea and
the pan Jak1/2 small molecule inhibitor, Ruxolitinib [8].
Although these therapies provide significant palliative
relief of some disease associated symptomologies,
they do so for a relatively small percentage of treated
patients. For example, in the case of Ruxolitinib, only
22% of treated patients (11 of 51) exhibited clinical
improvement and not a single patient exhibited either
partial or complete disease remission [9]. A very recent
report has perhaps identified a mechanism for the poor
clinical response that has been observed with Ruxolitinib.
Specifically, when Jak2-V617F expressing cells were
exposed to Ruxolitinib in culture, the drug was able to
significantly reduce MPN cell viability [10]. However,
when the same cells were co-cultured with bone
marrow stroma derived from MPN patients, the ability
of Ruxolitinib to reduce Jak2-V617F cell viability was
lost [10]. Interestingly, this was not observed when the
same Jak2-V617F MPN cells were co-cultured with bone
marrow stroma taken from non-diseased, age matched,
control subjects [10]. One reported difference between
the MPN and non-diseased stroma was that the levels of
inflammatory cytokines were significantly elevated in the
MPN samples [10]. Thus, these results suggest that bone
marrow stromal derived factors play a significant role in
protecting Jak2-V617F positive cells from Ruxolitinibinduced cell death, thereby highlighting the role of the
bone marrow micro-environment not only in the MPN
disease pathogenesis, but also in resistance to subsequent
Jak2 targeted therapies.
Predictive simulation modeling is an emerging
technology in the realm of personalized medicine. A
computational simulation avatar is created via genomic
profiling information that is derived for a given cell
line or patient biopsy. A digital library of molecularly
targeted drugs is tested on this individual avatar (N=1),
where drug agents are combined at different doses via
simulation-based computation, resulting in analyses of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

the effects of a large number of drug combinations on
various tumor phenotypes, including cell proliferation,
apoptosis, and viability. A critical feature of this
approach is that the drug library can be composed of
drugs that have been approved for other indications and/
or new investigative drug agents. The assessment of drug
impact can be done under variations of the bone marrow
micro-environment from the paracrine perspective, and
along with the genomics driven autocrine loops, can
provide insight into factors that are interfering with
drug response. Shortlisted drugs and drug combinations
are then experimentally validated on immortalized cell
lines that represent the disease of interest or patient cells
ex vivo. This predictive simulation approach differs
from other biological modeling methodologies in that
it incorporates integrated cancer physiology networks
that cover all disease phenotypes in the simulation
and provides semi-quantitative outputs and trends
[11-13]. The network is manually aggregated from
experimental data and addresses issues of contradictory
datasets via evaluation of both the quality and context
of the experimental data. In addition, the network is
continuously updated with information from new reports
using a regression based engineering methodology with
stringent quality control. Thus, this semiconductor
engineering based methodology creates a dynamic
and transparent disease physiology model that makes
feasible, a large quantum of simulation based drug
combination hypotheses that can then be prospectively
validated.
Given the importance of the tumor microenvironment on both MPN disease pathogenesis and
drug resistance, we hypothesized herein that predictive
simulation modeling could be employed in order to better
understand the role of inflammatory cytokines on drug
efficacy and resistance, and to develop a methodology to
tease out the causal factors for enhancing or reducing the
response of the prospectively validated shortlisted drug
combinations. To test this, we selected two representative
MPN cell lines, Human erythroleukemia 92.1.7 (HEL) and
SET2, and obtained their genomic profile. The HEL cell
is largely defined by the Jak2-V617F mutation, along with
deletion of CDKN2A, RB1 and TP53 [14-16]; while the
SET-2 cells are defined by Jak2 mutations as well as TP53,
and additional mutations and copy number variations as
reported in C-BioPortal [16]. Simulation avatars were
then created for each cell line and the signaling networks
were simulated, both with and without inflammatory
cytokines tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFα), interferon
gamma (IFNγ) and interleukin 6 (IL-6). We identified
two drugs (the Jak2 kinase inhibitor, G6, and the Bcl-2
inhibitor, ABT737) that could significantly reduce MPN
cell viability when used alone and their effects were
synergistic when used in combination. Furthermore, we
found that the inflammatory cytokine TNFα increased
the sensitivity of the single drug agents and their use in
35990

Oncotarget

combination. On the other hand, IFNγ reduced sensitivity
of the individual drugs while having no impact on the
combination, while IL-6 was found to not impact the drug
sensitivity in these profiles.

simulation models were validated at the biomarker and
phenotype level against available experimental results on
these cell lines.

Retrospective validation of virtual HEL and
SET2 cell lines

RESULTS

In order to determine the confidence of the
virtual MPN HEL and SET2 cell lines, we evaluated
the correlation of predicted outcomes with that various
known experimental datasets in the literature including
Rubert et al. [17], Will et al. [16], and Pardanani et al.
[18]. Figures 2A shows the predictive data for the effect
of NVP-BSK805 (a Jak2 inhibitor) on the Jak2-V617F
dominant SET2 cell line. In particular, the simulation
modeling predicted increases of the apoptotic markers
cleaved PARP, Caspases-3, -7 -,8 and -9, BIM as well as
decreases in phosphorylated STAT5 and anti-apoptotic
MCL1 (Figure 2A). These predictions aligned very well
with the previously published experimental data for this
cell line and this drug effect [17].
Figure 2B depicts the predictive simulation data
of the effect of JAK Inhibitor-1 treated HEL cells.
Specifically, the simulations predicted reductions of
phosphorylated STAT5, AKT, and ERK, as well as

Predictive simulation modeling
The simulation model used herein includes
representation of important signaling pathways implicated
in cancer as detailed in the methods below (Figure 1). The
SET2 and HEL cell line models that are representative of
Jak2-V617F driven MPN were created as described in the
methods. The mutation and copy number variation (CNV)
aberration data for these cell lines were obtained from the
literature and cancer portals such as Sanger and cBioportal
[14-16, Appendix 1]. SET2 cells, besides having the Jak2V617F mutation, also has mutations in RPTOR, TP53,
CCNA2, NOTCH2, EGF, MAP2K1 as well as multiple
gene amplifications and deletions as listed in Appendix
1. Definition for the HEL cell line obtained from Sanger
comprised of mutations in Jak2, TP53, CDKN2A, as well
as RB1 deletion and E2F1 amplification. There are also
many CNVs (Appendix 1). Once defined, the cell line

Figure 1: Schematic diagram of ™CELLWORKS cancer cell platform. A high level schematic diagram of the key pathways

including inputs such as growth factors, cytokines, kinases, adaptors, transcription and translation machineries; cellular processes such as
protein homeostasis, oxidative and ER stress, DNA repair, epigenetic regulations, tumor metabolism, cell cycle regulation; and the various
tumor phenotypes of proliferation, viability, metastasis, angiogenesis, immune regulation, apoptosis; present in the virtual tumor cell
technology. The Cellworks Oncology Platform was customized to create the virtual MPN cell lines HEL and SET2.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

35991

Oncotarget

increased cleaved PARP. We found that the predictive
data matched with the retrospective experimental results
of JAK Inhibitor-1 treated HEL cells [16]. Will et al. also
presented results on the enhancement of efficacy of JAK
inhibitor-1 on apoptosis in SET2 cells, by the inclusion
of the BCL2 inhibitor, ABT737 [16]. This combination
of JAK inhibitor-1, along with BCL2 inhibitor ABT737,
was therefore tested predictively on the virtual SET2 cell
line. The predictive results are presented as Figure 2C. We
found that the predictive results matched the experimental
results [16], thereby validating the virtual SET2 cell line,
retrospectively.
Pardanani et al. similarly tested the ability of the
Jak2 kinase inhibitor, TG101209, to inhibit HEL cell
proliferation [18]. Our predictive simulation modeling
(Figure 2D) correlated very well with the previously
generated experimental data [18], thereby validating the
virtual HEL cell line in this regard.

Thus, when taken together, the data in Figure 2
validated, on a retrospective basis, the virtual SET and
HEL cell lines. Consequently, the avatars for these two
cell lines can be digitally leveraged, in order to better
understand MPN biology.

Prospective validation of predictive
simulations and synergistic interaction
between ABT737 and G6
The predictive simulation modeling and the
subsequent therapeutic drug simulations indicated that the
Bcl2 inhibitor, ABT737, and the pre-clinical Jak2 kinase
inhibitor, G6, would be efficacious against Jak2 driven
pathogenesis, when used alone and synergistically when
used in combination. ABT737 is a BH3 mimetic and
inhibits several proliferative genes including Bcl-2, BclxL, and Bcl-w [19]. G6 is a preclinical Jak kinase inhibitor

Figure 2: Predictive vs. experimental correlation of various JAK inhibitors on HEL and SET2 cells. A. The predictive

plot with % change in protein levels for the indicated disease markers expressed in SET2 cells after virtual treatment with BSK805. B. The
simulation avatar predicted effect of JAK inhibitor-1 on pSTAT, pAKT, pERK, and cleaved PARP in HEL cells. C. The simulation avatarpredicted dose response effect of JAK inhibitor-1, with or without ABT737, on apoptosis in SET cells. ‘C’ is the concentration of the drug
at 60% on-target inhibition. D. Simulation avatar predictive dose response curve for the JAK inhibitor, TG101209, on HEL cell viability
with varying the C concentration (60% on-target inhibition) from C/1000 to 10C.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

35992

Oncotarget

with a Jak selectivity profile of Jak2>Jak3>>Jak1>>>Tyk2
[20]. The STAT selectivity profile for this compound is
STAT5>STAT3>STAT1, and its principal mechanism of
action is induction of apoptosis [21]. Figure 3A shows the
ABT737 predictive simulation results indicting a dosedependent decrease on HEL cell viability, while Figure
3B shows the validation of these results on cultured cells.
Figure 3C shows the predictive simulation results of
G6 on HEL cell viability while Figure 3D displays the
prospective validation of those forecasts.
Figure 4A shows the predictive effect of the drugs,
when used in combination, on HEL cell viability. The
simulations predicted a synergistic relationship between
the two compounds. To validate these data, we treated

HEL cells with various combinations of ABT737 and G6,
and subsequently measured HEL cell viability. We found
that the experimental results closely paralleled the virtual
simulations and thus validated the predicted results (Figure
4B). In order to determine if the relationship between
ABT737 and G6 was in fact synergistic, we simulated
various dosages of G6 and ABT737 in combination, in
order to identify the minimum concentration that could
achieve at least 50% reduction in cell viability. The
results from these simulation studies are plotted in the
isobologram shown in Figure 4C. The isobologram plot
has the concentration of the Jak2 inhibitor, G6, on the
y-axis and the concentration of the BCL2 inhibitor on the
x-axis. The red line connects the IC50 concentrations of

Figure 3: Prospective validation of predictive simulations and synergistic interaction between ABT737 and G6. A. The

virtual HEL cell line was simulated with increasing concentrations of ABT737 (C/10 to 8C) and the percent of viable cells was plotted as
a function of drug concentration. ‘C’ is the predicted concentration of the drug at 60% on-target inhibition. B. Prospective validation of the
drug effect whereby HEL cells were treated with the indicated concentrations of ABT737 and viability was measured three days later. Each
data point was measured in triplicate. C. The virtual HEL cell line was simulated with increasing concentrations of the JAK inhibitor (C/10
to 8C), G6, and the percent of viable cells was plotted as a function of drug concentration. ‘C’ is the predicted concentration of the drug
at 60% on-target inhibition. D. Prospective correlation of the G6 effect whereby HEL cells were treated with the indicated concentrations
of G6 and viability was measured three days later. Each data point was measured in triplicate. Shown is one of three (B) or two (D)
representative results.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

35993

Oncotarget

Inflammatory cytokines modulate the effects of
ABT737 and G6 on cell viability

the two drugs. Combinations of the drugs at the varied
doses indicates that a combination of Jak2 inhibitor, along
with BCL2 inhibitor at half the IC50 G6 dose, along with
1/3rd of the ABT737 dose, indicated by the black cross
on the left, could achieve the same 50% inhibition as the
individual IC50 doses. Similarly 1/3rd of G6 dose with half
of the ABT737 dose, as indicated by the black cross on the
right, also gave an IC50 inhibition, indicating that these two
drugs are synergistic in reducing HEL cell viability.
Collectively, predictive cellular modeling and
subsequent drug simulations indicated that ABT737
and G6 would significantly decrease HEL cell viability
when used individually, and synergistically, when used in
combination. The subsequent prospective validation on
cultured HEL cells validated those predictions. As such,
these studies validate the virtual HEL cell line and how
two investigative drug agents affect it.

Cytokine storm is a common syndrome within
MPN patients. It is characterized by increased levels
of inflammatory cytokines, both in the bone marrow
and the peripheral blood [22-25]. Within the bone
marrow, inflammatory cytokines such as IL-6 and TNFα
contribute to a number of deleterious actions including the
development of drug resistance. For example, previous
reports have shown that inflammatory cytokines, per se,
can render MPN cells resistant to Jak kinase inhibitors
including Ruxolitinib and atiprimod [10, 26]. Interestingly,
because of the distinct mechanisms of actions for ABT737
and G6, our predictive simulation modeling indicated
these investigative drugs would not be adversely affected
by inflammatory cytokines. To explore this, we first

Figure 4: Prospective validation of predictive simulations avatars and synergistic interaction between ABT737 and
G6. A. The virtual HEL cell line was simulated with the indicated concentrations of ABT737 (fixed dose of drug IC25 and IC50 viability)

and dose response of varying dose of G6 with ‘C’ being the predicted concentration of the drug at 60% on-target inhibition, and cell viability
was then plotted as a function of drug concentrations. B. Prospective validation of the drug effects on cultured HEL cells treated with the
indicated concentrations of ABT737 and G6. Cell viability was then measured three days later. Each data point was measured in triplicate.
Shown is one of three representative results. C. An isobologram showing the IC50 concentrations of the two drugs (red line), plotted as
a function of individual drug concentrations. The black crosses indicate the sub-IC50 concentrations that were required to reduce the cell
viability by one-half, thereby indicating synergy between ABT737 and G6.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

35994

Oncotarget

examined receptor expression for IL-6, TNFα, and IFNγ,
on both SET-2 and HEL cells. We found that both cell
lines lacked IL-6 receptor expression so therefore, this
cytokine would serve as an appropriate negative control.
However, both cell lines were found to express the
appropriate compliment of receptors for both TNFα and
IFNγ. Moreover, our predictive simulations indicated that
these two inflammatory cytokines would not hinder the
actions of ABT737 and G6. Figure 5A shows the predicted
effect of G6 on SET-2 cell viability, both in the presence
and absence of IL-6. Given the lack of IL-6 receptor
expression on SET-2 cells, our simulations indicated that
IL-6 would not impact the ability of G6 to reduce SET2 cell viability. This was confirmed experimentally when
SET-2 cells were treated with increasing concentrations
of G6, both in the presence and absence of IL-6 (Figure
5B). With respect to HEL cells, our predictive modeling

indicated that IL-6 would similarly be without effect
while TNFα would potentiate the effect of G6 on reducing
HEL cell viability (Figure 5C). This was confirmed
experimentally whereby the IL-6 was found to be without
effect whereas TNFα increased the sensitivity of the
cells to concentrations of G6 that were between 1 - 10
μM (Figure 5D). When ABT737 was modeled into the
simulations, we found that TNFα potentiated the effect
of not only G6, but also the combination of G6 and
ABT737 (Figure 6A). When this was tested in cultured
cells, we observed a similar result (Figure 6B). IFNγ on
the other hand decreased the sensitivity of G6, post a
threshold concentration when used alone (Figure 6B), and
did not show much impact on the efficacy when used in
combination.
Overall, the results in Figures 5 and 6 indicate that,
rather than diminishing the inhibitory potential of G6 and

Figure 5: Inflammatory cytokines differentially affect the efficacy of G6. A. The virtual SET2 cell line was simulated with

the indicated concentrations G6, both in the presence and absence of IL-6. ‘C’ is the predicted concentration of the drug at 60% on-target
inhibition. The percent of viable cells was then plotted as a function of G6 concentration. B. Prospective validation of the IL-6 effect on
cultured SET2 cells whereby the percent of viable cells was plotted as a function of G6 concentration, both in the presence and absence of
IL-6. Each data point was measured in triplicate. Shown is one of three representative results. C. The virtual HEL cell line was simulated
with the indicated concentrations of G6, both in the presence and absence of either IL-6 or TNFα. The percent of viable cells was then
plotted as a function of G6 concentration. D. Prospective validation of the cytokine effect on cultured HEL cells whereby the percent of
viable cells was plotted as a function of G6 concentration, both with and without cytokine. Each data point was measured in triplicate.
Shown is one of three representative results.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

35995

Oncotarget

ABT737, TNFα in fact augments them while IFNγ and
IL6 did not show much impact. Thus, the combination
therapy of G6 and ABT737 is not only highly effective at
reducing HEL cell viability, but also withstands cytokine
induced drug resistance normally caused by TNFα.

have clearly demonstrated an acquired drug resistance
that involves inflammatory cytokines [10, 26]. Thus,
identifying therapeutic agents that can reduce MPN cell
viability, especially in the face of inflammatory cytokines
present in the bone marrow microenvironment, is highly
desirable. Here, we used predictive simulation modeling
in order to identify drug agents that could not only
reduce MPN cell viability, but do so despite bone marrow
derived inflammatory cytokines. To this end, we found
that the Jak2 kinase inhibitor, G6, and the Bcl-2 inhibitor,
ABT737, significantly reduced MPN cell viability when
used alone, and their effects were synergistic when
used in combination. Furthermore, we found that the
inflammatory cytokine, TNF-α, increased the sensitivity
of the single drug agents and their use in combination.
As such, these results have defined a novel set of drug
agents that have a differentiating element when compared
to currently available front line therapies; namely, an
ability to be more, rather than less potent, in the face of an
inflammatory cytokine in the form of TNF-α.
In PV, >90% of the patients harbor the Jak2-V617F
mutation and in most instances, this is both the key and
only aberration. In such profiles, there is a Jak2 driven
up-regulation of anti-apoptotic genes BCL2, MCL1,

DISCUSSION
Dysregulated Jak2 kinase signaling has been
implicated in a number of human pathologies including
hypertension, diabetes, and cancer [27]. Within the bone
marrow, dysregulated Jak2 signaling is known to be a
causative agent in MPN [27, 28]. The constitutive Jak2dependent signaling drives excessive proliferation and
differentiation of cells within the myeloid lineage. With
respect to potential drug therapies, unfortunately, over
the past few years, six Jak2 small molecule inhibitors
have been abandoned in clinical studies for either a
lack of efficacy and/or severe adverse events [29, 30].
These include drugs developed by Lilly (Gandotinib),
Bristol-Myers Squibb (BMS-911543), Sanofi Aventis
(Fedratinib), Cephalon (Lestaurtinib), AstraZeneca
(AZD1480) and Exelixis (XL019). Moreover, for the
only FDA approved Jak2 inhibitor, Ruxolitinib, studies

Figure 6: Inflammatory cytokines differentially affect the efficacy of ABT737 and G6. A. The virtual HEL cell line was

simulated with the indicated concentrations G6 and ABT737, both in the presence and absence of either TNFα or INF-γ. The percent
of viable cells for each condition was then plotted as a function of G6 concentration. B. Prospective validation of the cytokine effect on
cultured HEL cells whereby the number of viable cells was plotted as a function of G6 concentration. Each data point was measured in
triplicate. Shown is one of three representative results.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

35996

Oncotarget

BCL2L1 [18, 28]. There is also an increased activation of
proliferative genes such as CCND1, CCNE1 and CCNA1
and cell cycle kinases including CDK2/4 [31]. Figure 7
depicts the signaling networks that are dysregulated in a
model of Jak2-mediated pathogenesis and the impact of
IL-6, IFN-γ, and TNF-α on those signaling networks. In
addition, the schematic shows the nodes of inhibition for
the BCL2 inhibitor ABT737 and Jak2 kinase inhibitor
G6. In a Jak2-V617F driven profile, the Jak2 downstream
signaling via STAT3, STAT5, PI3K/AKT, SHC1/ERK
and STAT1 are activated [30, 31]. In this schematic of
HEL cell signaling, besides the JAK2 mutation, there
is also a loss of function mutation of TP53, deletion of
RB1 and CDKN2A as well as amplification of E2F1, all
leading to increased proliferation and viability. G6 inhibits
the dominant Jak2 signaling in this Jak2 mutant driven

network. BCL2, a key anti-apoptotic protein is activated
downstream of the Jak2-V617 mutation via STAT3,
STAT5, and NF-kB. Thus, inhibiting this downstream
signal, along with a more direct inhibition of the driver
pathway, synergize to inhibit cell proliferation and viability
as we prospectively validated in MPN representative cell
lines. One advantage of the G6 and ABT-737 combination
therapy is that it synergizes by inhibiting both proliferation
and viability; specifically, G6 inhibits the proliferative
impact of the Jak2 mutation itself while ABT-737 targets
the anti-apoptotic pathways. Moreover, the Jak2-V617F
mutation activates multiple anti-apoptotic proteins,
including MCL1. Inhibition of Jak2 by G6 inhibits MCL1
via downstream inhibition of its transcription factors [21]
and therefore contributes further to enhancing induction
of apoptosis and reducing tumor cell viability. This also

Figure 7: Scientific rationale schematic for the HEL disease network and the impact of the cytokines in the tumor
microenvironment on the efficacy of G6 and ABT737 combination therapy. A network schematic depicting the key pathways
and aberrations present in HEL cell line that has JAK2-V617F as a key driver mutation along with a mutation of P53, deletion of RB1
and CDKN2A and amplification of E2F1. A constitutively activated JAK2 mutant activates various downstream pathway loops leading
to activation of ERK, AKT and key transcription factors including STAT3, STAT5, NFkB, AP1 and others. This along with the other
aberrations converge at a highly proliferative phenotype and increased cell viability. The cytokine modulated pathways are depicted in
terms of how they interact with the JAK2 driven disease network. IFNγ and IL6 converge via JAK2 wild type signaling and therefore are
not showing a significant impact in changing the outcome of G6 efficacy since JAK2 is mutated and constitutively activated. TNFα on the
other hand activates NFkB, but also activates the pro-apoptotic pathway loop, thereby enhancing the efficacy of the JAK2 inhibitor and the
combination. The inhibitors G6 and ABT737 are also shown inhibiting their respective targets and the schematic highlights the rationale for
the use of these two drugs in combination in a JAK2-V617F driven MPN disease network.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

35997

Oncotarget

addresses the possible resistance mechanism that can arise
when MCL1 expression increases subsequent to BCL2
inhibition [32, 33].
Across the various cytokines measured in the
plasma of MPN patients, eight chief cytokines have
been described; MIP-1β, TNF-α, IL-6, GM-CSF, IFN-γ,
G-CSF, IFN-α, and Rantes [24, 25, 34]. The observed
concentration of these cytokines in MPN patients is
higher than that in normal donors, consistent with other
published reports [23]. Of these cytokines, we determined
the impact of IL-6, TNF-α, and IFN-γ on our virtual cell
lines, with subsequent experimental validation. Given the
lack of IL-6 receptor expression on HEL and SET-2 cells,
IL-6 was predictably without effect. The predicted and
validated effect of IFNγ on drug efficacy was minimal.
Lastly, we found that TNFα potentiated the efficacy of
the drug agents when used either alone or in combination.
As such, these studies define novel interactions between
inflammatory cytokines and experimental drug efficacy,
which can potentially be exploited for circumventing
mechanisms of cytokine-induced drug resistance.
The predictive simulation modeling that was
employed in this work integrates signal transduction,
epigenetic regulation, protein homeostasis, metabolic
pathways, and other phenotypes representing not
just MPN, but all cancers (Figure 1). The platform as
demonstrated in this study, has the ability to predict cellular
outcomes and the subsequent identification of personalized
therapeutic assets for any given profile, whether it is
a cancer cell line such as those used herein or a human
patient sample [11-13]. The workflow utilizes drug
agents that can either be FDA approved (i.e., ABT737)
or under investigation (i.e., G6). As such, FDA approved
drugs can readily be repurposed for new indications
which provides a rapid path to clinical translation, while
investigational drugs can rapidly be screened in silico
in various profiles and disease models across a large
number of phenotypes and biomarkers. This can provide
an in-depth insight into efficacy and mechanistic details
without putting in extensive resource, time, and efforts
into running experiments. The data provided herein have
been used as the foundation for a personalized medicine
approach for several hematological disorders. Specifically,
peripheral blood and/or bone marrow samples are being
collected from myelofibrosis, multiple myeloma, acute
myeloid leukemia, acute lymphoblastic leukemia, and
myelodysplastic syndrome patients under an IRB approved
protocol (NCT02435550). After collection, the samples
are being subjected to next-generation sequence (NGS)
analysis, protein mutation analysis, and metabolomic
analysis. The profiling data are then being fed into the
predictive simulation modeling, where a short list of novel
drug combinations is subsequently generated for each
patient. The drug combinations are then being validated
on ex vivo cultures using the same patient’s primary cells.
The most efficacious therapy is then being tested in the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

patient. Consequently, the studies described in this current
work have served as the basis for a hematological-based,
precision medicine campaign that can readily be leveraged
into other cancers as well.
In summary, this work identified two investigative
drug agents that act significantly when used alone and
synergistically when used in combination, to reduce the
viability of two MPN model cell lines. We found that their
efficacy is potentiated by some inflammatory cytokines
that are typically elevated in MPN. Thus, by accurately
predicting responses of cells to targeted agents a priori in
context of their genomics and microenvironment, the in
silico simulation model provides an innovative approach
to precision medicine for not only MPN, but other
neoplastic disorders as well.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cancer simulation model
The simulation experiments and analyses
were performed using the predictive tumor model, a
comprehensive and dynamic network of signaling, and
metabolic pathways in the context of cancer physiology
as described [35]. The simulation model used herein, as
depicted in a very high level schematic of the network in
Figure 1, includes growth factors like EGFR, PDGFR,
FGFR, c-MET, VEGFR and IGF-1R; cytokine and
chemokines like IL1, IL4, IL6, IL12, TNFα, IFNγ;
GPCR mediated signaling pathways; mTOR signaling;
cell cycle regulations; tumor metabolism; oxidative and
ER stress; representation of autophagy and proteosomal
degradation; DNA damage repair, p53 signaling and
apoptotic cascade. The network also includes epigenetic
regulation mechanisms and shows all the phenotypes
that are modeled and can be assessed. The referenced
current version of cancer model includes more than
4700 intracellular biological entities and ~6500 reactions
representing their interactions regulated by ~25000 kinetic
parameters. This comprises a comprehensive and extensive
coverage of the kinome, transcriptome, proteome, and the
metabolome. There are 142 kinases and 102 transcription
factors modeled in the system.

Simulation protocol
The simulation protocol for the testing of the drug
combinations in the virtual MPN cell line models for HEL
and SET2 in context of the different microenvironment
based cytokine variation consisted of the following steps:
1.	 Control stage: The model is simulated for 50,000
seconds simulation time during which the different
species (biological entities including enzymes, receptors,
metabolites etc.) attain a steady state concentration. This
concentration is dependent upon the balance between
the rate of reaction nodes producing the species and the
35998

Oncotarget

reaction nodes utilizing/degrading the species. This is the
un-triggered control baseline.

CDK-Cyclin complexes that define cell cycle check points
and are key for regulating overall tumor proliferation
potential. The biomarkers include: CDK4-CCND1,
CDK2-CCNE, CDK2-CCNA and CDK1-CCNB1. The
biomarkers have been given a certain weightage and
permutations of the same have been tested to reach to an
index definition that gives the maximum correlation with
the experimentally reported trend for proliferation across
a large number of studies.
The viability index is a ratio of two sub-indices:
Survival over Apoptosis. The components for each of the
sub-indices have been selected based on their regulation
and convergence towards these endpoints. The biomarkers
constituting the survival index include: AKT1, BCL2,
MCL1, BIRC5, BIRC2 and XIAP. All these biomarkers
have been well reported to supporting tumor survival. The
apoptosis index comprises of: BAX, CASP3, NOXA and
CASP8. The overall cell viability index is then calculated
as a ratio of survival index/apoptosis index. The weightage
of each biomarker is decided to achieve a maximum
correlation with experimental trends for the end points.

2.	 Disease stage: At simulation time of 50,000
seconds, the genomic aberrations for a profile (cell line or
patient biopsy) is overlaid on the control network through
representing the aberrations as increased or decreased
expression/activity of genes or proteins to represent copy
number variations and mutations respectively. The system
is then simulated further to 125,000 seconds simulation
time. During this time, the system attains a new steady
state which aligns to the network dynamics of the tumor
cell line or patient profile depending on the genomic input
file.
3.	 Disease + Drug Stage: Once the disease baseline
is created, the drug is introduced in the system at 125,000
seconds by perturbing the target reaction nodes to
represent the drug mechanism of action. The system is
simulated further until 200,000 seconds simulation time.
The percentage change seen in values of the biomarkers
and phenotypes such as viability and proliferation index
from the disease baseline give the read out for the
therapeutic potential of the drug.
4.	 Disease + Microenvironment + Drug: To the
disease baseline we first add in the changed cytokine
and chemokine paracrine inputs, either cumulatively
or individually, and simulate to create the disease
baseline variant with the microenvironment. The drug
can then be simulated on this modified disease baseline
in presence of the microenvironment factors to assess
response, and compare against the response without the
microenvironment factors.

Simulation of drug effect
To simulate the effect of a drug in the in silico tumor
model, the targets and mechanism of action of the drug are
determined from published literature and defined through
a specialized syntax. The drug concentration is explicitly
assumed to be post-ADME (Absorption, Distribution,
Metabolism and Excretion), at the site of action and the
dose response of the drug entails varying the percentage
target inhibition of the primary drug target that could
equate to different concentrations of the drug in the in vivo
setting.

Creation of cell line models
To create the MPN cell line models SET2 and
HEL, we used the simulation protocol described above.
Genetic profiles (mutation and CNV) of these cell lines
were derived from sequencing and cytogenetic data in the
literature. Data obtained from the cBioportal and Sanger
databases were used as input files to trigger the system
to a neoplastic disease state (Appendix 1 has the profile
definitions). Oncogenic mutations are modeled as gain
of function at the protein activity level and mutations
in tumor suppressors are modeled as loss of function.
Deletion and amplification aberrations are modeled by
over-expressing or knocking down the expression of the
gene at the level of its transcription. These representations
of the genomic aberrations are input in the form of a bioassembly code and overlaid on the control network that is
then simulated to achieve the dynamic disease state.
Disease phenotypes such as proliferation and
viability indexes can be assessed to ascertain disease
induction and severity. Disease phenotype indices are
defined in the tumor model as functions of biomarkers that
are involved in regulating these aspects of the tumor cell.
The proliferation index is an average function of the active
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Experimental methods
Cell culture
HEL cells were purchased from ATCC (Rockville,
MD). SET-2 cells were obtained from DSMZ
(Braunschweig, Germany). The cells were cultured in
RPMI-1640 medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum
at 37°C in a 5% CO2 humidified atmosphere and passaged
at least two times per week. The Jak2 inhibitor, G6, was
obtained from the NIH/NCI drug repository (NSC33994).
The Bcl2 inhibitor, ABT737, was obtained from Selleck
Chemicals. The IL-6, TNFα, and IFNγ were purchased
from R&D Systems (Minneapolis, MN).
Measurements of cell viability
Log phase cells were seeded in 96-well plates
at 30,000 cells per well in 100 μl of media containing
either 0.25% DMSO or varying concentrations of drug.
Cell viability was determined 68-72 hours later via the
CellTiter 96AqueousOne Solution Reagent from Promega
(Madison, WI) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
35999

Oncotarget

Specifically, 20 μl of reagent was added to each well and
plates were incubated for 2-3 hours at 37oC and absorbance
was then read at 490nm using a 96-well plate reader. Data
are expressed as a percentage of vehicle-treated cells
(0.25% DMSO), which was arbitrarily defined as 100%
viable.

5.	 Nakasone ES, Askautrud HA, Kees T, Park J-H, Plaks
V, Ewald AJ, Fein M, Rasch MG, Tan Y-X, Qiu J, Park
J, Sinha P, Bissell MJ, et al. Imaging Tumor-Stroma
interactions during chemotherapy reveals contributions of
the microenvironment to resistance. Cancer Cell 2012; 21:
488-503.

Statistics

6.	 Dalton W. The influence of the tumor microenvironment on
drug response and drug resistance. Clin Cancer Res 2008;
PLO4-03.

All results were expressed as mean ± SD. Statistical
comparisons were done using the Student’s t-test as well
as a repeated measures analysis of variance followed by
Bonferroni and Student-Newman-Keuls post hoc tests for
multiple comparisons. P values of <0.05 were considered
statistically significant. There is no statistical variation
seen in the predictive results since it is based on a kinetic
model that will achieve the same results with repeated
perturbations. The variation can be seen by varying the
perturbations/inputs.

7.	 Ma X, Vanasse G, Cartmel B, Wang Y, Selinger
HA. Prevalence of polycythemia vera and essential
thrombocythemia. Am J Hematol. 2008; 83:359-362.
8.	 Verstovsek S, Kantarjian H, Mesa RA, Pardanani AD,
Cortes-Franco J, Thomas DA, Estrov Z, Fridman JS,
Bradley EC, Erickson-Viitanen S, Vaddi K, Levy R,
Tefferi A. Safety and efficacy of INCB018424, a JAK1
and JAK2 inhibitor, in myelofibrosis. N Engl J Med. 2010;
363:1117-1127.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

9.	 Abdelrahman RA, Begna KH, Al-Kali A, Hogan WJ,
Litzow MR, Tefferi A. Revised assessment of response and
long-term discontinuation rates among 111 patients with
myelofibrosis treated with Momelotinib or Ruxolitinib.
Leukemia 2015; 29:498-500.

S.S.K. was supported by National Institution of
Health (R21CA178301 and R01CA169259), American
Cancer Society grant (RSG-13-047), and Harvard Stem
Cell Institute Blood Program Pilot Grant (DP-0110-1200). P.P.S. was supported by a fee-for-service contract
from the Cellworks Group, Inc. (Project #0011-1274).

10.	 Manshouri T, Estrov Z, Knez L, Zhang Y,Bozinovic K,
Dembitz V, Kantarjian HM, Verstovsek S. Bone marrow
stromal cell paracrine factors from PMF patients, but
not healthy donors, protect JAK2-V617F cells from
Ruxolitinib-Induced Apoptosis. 56th Annual Meeting
and Exposition of the American Society of Hematology,
Abstract #1872, San Francisco, CA, December 6-9, 2014.

CONFLICTS OF INTERET
S.S.K. has received honoraria from Bristol-Myers
Squibb. S.V. is employed as a co-founder of Cellworks
Group, Inc. A.K. and N.S. are employed by Cellworks
Research India Pvt Ltd. T.A. is employed as a co-founder
and board member of Cellworks Group, Inc. P.P.S.
received a fee-for-service contract from the Cellworks
Group Inc.

11.	 Doudican NA, Kumar A, Singh NK, Nair PR, Lala DA,
Basu K, Talwdekar AA, Sultana Z, Tiwari KK, Tyagi A,
Abbasi T, Vali S, Vij R, et al. Personalization of cancer
treatment using predictive simulation.” J Transl Med. 2015;
13:43.
12.	 Pingle SC, Sultana Z, Pastorino S, Jiang P, Mukthavaram
R, Chao Y, Bharati IS, Nomura N, Makale M, Abbasi T,
Kapoor S, Kumar A, Usmani S, et al. In silico modeling
predicts drug sensitivity of patient-derived cancer cells. J
Transl Med. 2014; 12:128.

REFERENCES
1.	

Junttila MR, de Sauvage FJ. Influence of tumor microenvironment heterogeneity on therapeutic response. Nature
2013; 501:346-354.

13.	 Doudican NA, Mazumder A, Kapoor S, Sultana Z, Kumar
A, Talawdekar A, Basu K, Agrawal A, Aggarwal A, Shetty
K, Singh NK, Kumar C, Tyagi A, et al. Predictive simulation
approach for designing cancer therapeutic regimens with
novel biological mechanisms. J Cancer 2014; 5:406-16.

2.	 Quail DF, Joyce JA. Microenvironmental regulation of
tumor progression and metastasis. Nature Medicine 2013;
19:1423–1437.

14.	 Jones AV, Bunyan DJ, Cross NCP. No evidence for
amplification of V617F JAK2 in myeloproliferative
disorders. Leukemia 2007; 21:2561-2563.

3.	 Agarwal P, Bhatia R. Influence of Bone Marrow
Microenvironment on Leukemic Stem Cells: Breaking
Up an Intimate Relationship. Adv Cancer Res. 2015;
127:227-252.

15.	 Kaeda J, Bonamino M, Ayres-Silva J, Solza C, Ringel F,
Blau O, Daumas A, Oberender C, Dorken B, le Coutre P,
Zalcberg I. Leuk Lymphoma 2014; 55: 128-35.

4.	 Straussman R, Morikawa T, Shee K, Barzily-Rokni M, Qian
ZR, Du J, Davis A, Mongare MM, Gould J, Frederick DT,
Cooper ZA, Chapman PB, Solit DB, et al. Tumor microenvironment elicits innate resistance to RAF inhibitors
through HGF secretion. Nature 2012; 487:500-504.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16.	 Will B, Siddiqi T, Jorda MA, Shimamura T, Luptakova
K, Staber PB, Costa DB, Steidl U, Tenen DG, Kobayashi
S. Apoptosis induced by JAK2 inhibition is mediated by

36000

Oncotarget

Bim and enhanced by the BH3 mimetic ABT-737 in JAK2
mutant human erythroid cells. Blood 2010; 115: 2901-9.

myelofibrosis: a comprehensive cytokine profiling study. J
Clin Oncol. 2011 ; 29:1356-63.

17.	 Rubert J, Qian Z, Andraos R, Gulthy DA, Radimerski T.
Bim and Mcl-1 exert key roles in regulating JAK2V617F
cell survival. BMC Cancer 2011; 11:24.

26.	 Manshouri T, Estrov Z, Quintas-Cardama A, et al. Bone
Marrow Stroma-Secreted Cytokines Protect JAK2V617FMutated cells from the effects of a JAK2 inhibitor. Cancer
Res 2011; 71: 3831-3840.

18.	 Pardanani A, Hood J, Lasho T, Levine RL, Martin MB,
Noronha G, Finke C, Mak CC, Mesa R, Zhu H, Soll R,
Gilliland DG, Tefferi A. TG101209, a small molecule
JAK2-selective kinase inhibitor potently inhibits
myeloproliferative disorder-associated JAK2V617F and
MPLW515L/K mutations. Leukemia 2007; 21: 1658-68.

27.	 Muhammad Furqan, Nikhil Mukhi, Byung Lee, and Delong
Liu. Dysregulation of JAK-STAT pathway in hematological
malignancies and JAK inhibitors for clinical application,
Biomark Res. 2013; 1:5.
28.	 McLornan D1, Percy M, McMullin MF. JAK2 V617F: a
single mutation in the myeloproliferative group of disorders.
Ulster Med J. 2006; 75:112-9.29

19.	 Oltersdorf T, Elmore SW et al. An inhibitor of Bcl-2 family
proteins induces regression of solid tumours. Nature 2005;
435: 677-81.

29.	 Bhagwat N, Levine RL, Koppikar P. Sensitivity and
resistance of JAK2 inhibitors to myeloproliferative
neoplasms. Int J Hematol. 2013; 97: 695-702

20.	 Kiss R, Polgár T, Kirabo A, Sayyah J, Figueroa NC, List
AF, Sokol L, Zuckerman KS, Gali M, Bisht KS, Sayeski
PP, Keseru GM. Identification of a novel inhibitor of JAK2
tyrosine kinase by structure-based virtual screening. Bioorg
Med Chem Lett 2009;19:3598-3601.

30.	 Meyer SC and Levine RL Molecular Pathways: Molecular
Basis for Sensitivity and Resistance to JAK Kinase
Inhibitors. 2014 Clin Cancer Res, 20: 2051

21.	 Kirabo B, Embury J, Kiss R, Polgar T, Gali M, Majumder
A, Bisht KS, Cogle CR, Keseru GM, Sayeski PP. The
stilbenoid tyrosine kinase inhibitor, G6, suppresses Jak2V617F-mediated human pathological cell growth in vitro
and in vivo. J Biol Chem 2011; 286: 4280-91.

31.	 Gabler K, Behrmann I, Haan C. JAK2 mutants (eg.
JAK2V617F) and their importance as drug targets in
myeloproliferative neoplasms. JAKSTAT 2013; 2: e25025.
32.	 Choudhary GS, Al-Harbi S, Mazumder S, Hill BT, Smith
MR, Bodo J, Hsi ED, Almasan A. MCL-1 and BCL-xLdependent resistance to the BCL-2 inhibitor ABT-199 can
be overcome by preventing PI3K/AKT/mTOR activation
in lymphoid malignancies. Cell Death Dis. 2015; 6: e1593.

22.	 Kalota A1, Jeschke GR, Carroll M, Hexner EO. Intrinsic
resistance to JAK2 inhibition in myelofibrosis. Clin Cancer
Res. 2013; 19:1729-39.
23.	 Fleischman AG1, Aichberger KJ, Luty SB, Bumm TG,
Petersen CL, Doratotaj S, Vasudevan KB, LaTocha DH,
Yang F, Press RD, Loriaux MM, Pahl HL, Silver RT, et
al. TNFα facilitates clonal expansion of JAK2V617F
positive cells in myeloproliferative neoplasms. Blood 2011;
118:6392-8.

33.	 Pan R, Ruvolo VR, Wei J, Konopleva M, Reed JC,
Pellecchia M, Andreeff M, Ruvolo PP. Inhibition of Mcl-1
with the pan-Bcl-2 family inhibitor (-)BI97D6 overcomes
ABT-737 resistance in acute myeloid leukemia. Blood
2015; 126: 363-72.
34.	 Pourcelot E, Trocme C, Mondet J, Bailly S, Toussaint B,
Mossuz P. Cytokine profiles in polycythemia vera and
essential thrombocythemia patients: clinical implications.
Exp Hematol. 2014; 42: 360-8.

24.	 Vaidya R1, Gangat N, Jimma T, Finke CM, Lasho TL,
Pardanani A, Tefferi A. Plasma cytokines in polycythemia
vera: phenotypic correlates, prognostic relevance, and
comparison with myelofibrosis. Am J Hematol. 2012;
87:1003-5.

35.	 Pingle SC, Sultana Z, Pastorino S, Jiang P, Mukthavaram
R, Chao Y, Bharati IS, Nomura N, Makale M, Abbasi T,
Kapoor S, Kumar A, Usmani S, et al. In silico modeling
predicts drug sensitivity of patient-derived cancer cells. J
Transl Med. 2014;12:128.

25.	 Tefferi A1, Vaidya R, Caramazza D, Finke C, Lasho T,
Pardanani A. Circulating interleukin (IL)-8, IL-2R, IL-12,
and IL-15 levels are independently prognostic in primary

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36001

Oncotarget

